Mind the Gap
Unpacking the puzzle of
income growth and weak
consumption in the UK and
other mysteries
Swati Dhingra
Knoop Lecture (18 November 2025)
I would like to thank Donal McVeigh, Jack Welling and Emily Fry for their
assistance in preparing these materials.
Mind the Gap
Bridging evidence gaps through
research to inform policymaking
2
Understanding the economy and designing policy is hardest
when it is needed the most during turbulent times
–
Covid-19 pandemic Energy price shock Data fog
Real GDP relative to Feb 2020 Utility bills Labour Force Survey response
Source: ONS and Bank calculations. Source: LSEG Datastream, ONS and Bank calculations. Source: ONS and Bank calculations.
Latest data: 2025 Q3. Latest data: September 2025. Latest data: 2025 Q2.
3
While the shocks could not have been anticipated, successive forecasts
during the inflation surge consistently undershot outturns on the way up
Successive CPI MPR forecasts, versus actual outturns
Source: ONS and Bank calculations. Latest data: November 2025 Monetary Policy Report (MPR).
4
Forecast errors across central banks (and private forecasters) were
relatively similar despite differences in modelling
Inflation, one year ahead forecast errors, 2015-23
Percentage points
Source: Forecasting for monetary policy making and communication at the Bank of England: a review | Bank of England
5
Unconventional policy tools performed better in some cases in containing
the inflation surge
Headline consumer price indices’ growth, international comparison
Latin America South East / East Asia Europe
Source: LSEG Datastream and Bank calculations. See Coibion and Gorodnichenko (2025) for more detail. Latest data: September 2025.
6
Research can bridge evidence gaps that distort policy: Example
• “The Bank of England appears to pin rising
inactivity on a ‘change to the supply of labour, Hourly wages, average year-on-year growth, per cent
independent of demand’. According to this 12
view, such a fall in labour supply would then put 10
2019-2023
upward pressure on wages. This could in turn 8
contribute to further cost-push inflation at a time 6
of already double-digit inflation. If true, this can 4
be seen as justification for a policy of raising 2
2014-2019
interest rates.” 0
-2
• In fact, areas where inactivity rose by more
-4
experienced smaller wage growth, not larger.
-30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30
Inactivity rate, change in percentage points
Notes: Each dot in the scatter plot represents a Travel to Work Area in the UK:
shows rise in inactivity (from APS) on the x-axis and average growth rate in hourly
wages (from ASHE) on the y-axis (2013-2023).
Source: Machin and Wadsworth, Economics Observatory (26 May 2023).
7
A Rich Vein or Fool’s Gold? Research, not tweaks to forecasts or
communications, can bridge evidence gaps that distort policy
• Experimenting with different assumptions and risks in a forecasting apparatus
can help think through uncertainties, but forecasts are even more error-prone in
turbulent times.
• Credible research design and measurement, not tweaks to forecasting
models or communications, can bridge evidence gaps that distort economic
policy and skew narratives.
• As the Bank undertakes reforms, this is an appropriate place to reiterate this
message and highlight where research could bridge the evidence gaps that
obscure our understanding of the economy today.
8
Three areas of discussion today for bridging evidence gaps
Unpacking the puzzle of Developing central bank Understanding the
income growth and weak toolkits to assess and effects of deglobalisation
consumption in the UK prepare for global and the new world
shocks and supply economic order
shocks
9
The puzzle of income growth and
weak consumption in the UK
10
Consumption growth has been consistently weaker than forecast
MPR consumption forecasts, year-on-year growth
Source: ONS and Bank calculations. Latest data: November 2025 Monetary Policy Report.
11
Alongside expectations for the saving ratio to fall back, which
hasn’t materialised
Households’ saving ratios across Blue Book and forecast vintages, per cent
Per cent Per cent
May 2024
12 12
May 2025
Aug 2024
Nov 2024
Nov 2025
10 10
Nov 2023
Feb 2025
8 8
Outturns Feb 2024
(Blue Book 2023)
Blue Book 2024 Aug 2025
6 6
Blue Book 2025
4 4
2022 2024 2026 2022 2024 2026 2028
Source: ONS and Bank calculations. Updated chart from Mann (2025). Latest data: November 2025 Monetary Policy Report.
12
Consumption has been weaker than peers, despite similar real
wage growth
Real consumption evolution Real private sector / negotiated wages, four-quarter growth
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Eurostat, ONS and Bank calculations. Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Eurostat, ONS and Bank calculations.
Latest data: 2025 Q3 (UK), 2025 Q2 (EA, US). Latest data: Q3 2025 (UK), Q2 2025 (EA, US).
13
And persistently diverged from households’ disposable income
Households' consumption and disposable income, inflation-adjusted levels
Source: ONSand Bank calculations. Latest data: Q2 2025.
14
Why does understanding the consumption puzzle matter?
Channels through which Bank
Rate impacts consumption
Intertemporal Housing Financial Value of debt Indirect
Cash-flow
substitution channel wealth effect Fisher effect labour income
15
How do the explanations matter for the outlook for consumption?
Tighter monetary policy, and so will pick up with lower interest rates
Past high inflation experience causing persistent, maybe even structural changes, in
consumption/saving behaviour
Increased uncertainty/risk causing households to do more precautionary saving, so
likely to not pick up if uncertainties continue
Re-building wealth that has been eroded by inflation, and so should pick up as inflation
falls
Source: Bank of England Monetary Policy Report (MPR), November 2025.
16
Is there really a consumption puzzle? Not in the microdata where
disposable incomes are just as weak as consumption
Real disposable income and real household final consumption (per capita)
Source: ONS and Bank calculations. Latest data: 2023/24.
17
How to assess the evidence? Let's look at each component of
Consumption + Savings = Disposable Income/Price
Let's get the Let's get the numerator Let's use Savings as
denominator right: right: Incomes are not a cross-check on real
Prices faced by just from wages, but also income minus
households for their from benefits and other consumption
consumption baskets sources
18
Let's get the denominator right: Household costs from spending
microdata is less optimistic on a real wage recovery
Level of real AWE relative to Q4 2019
Source: ONS and Bank calculations. Latest data: June 2025.
19
Let's get the numerator right: Only interest income has grown
consistently during the consumption puzzle period
Contributions to growth in real income since 2019 (per cent) Real change in income per person by source (since Q4 2021)
Source: ONS and Bank calculations. Latest data: Q2 2025. Source: ONS and Bank calculations. Latest data: Q2 2025.
20
Let's cross-check with savings: no uptick in savings during the
consumption puzzle period in income and spending microdata
Household saving ratio, by income quintile, financial year
Source: ONS and Bank calculations. Latest data: FYE 2024.
21
And seemingly high saving ratios look more muted for cash
measures of incomes less spending
Household saving ratio, per cent
Source: ONS and Bank calculations. Latest data: 2024.
22
Financial counterpart of savings shows paying down of debts, not
accumulation of liquid assets for future consumption
Difference in actual and trend household savings ratios (percentage points), since 2020 Q1
Source: ONS Households’ finances saving saving, UK: 2020 to 2024 (Figure 5). Latest data: Q1 2024.
23
Correspondingly deposits are stable, except for the top quintile
Household deposits by income quintile, deflated by quintile-specific inflation indices
Source: Bank of England/NMG Survey of Household Finances, ONS and Bank calculations. Latest data: H2 2025.
24
How to assess the evidence? Real consumption weakness seems
to be reflecting real disposable income weakness
Let's get the Let's get the numerator Let's use Savings
denominator right: right: Incomes are not as a cross-check on
Prices faced by just from wages, but also real income
households for their from benefits and other minus consumption
consumption baskets sources
Real disposable Nominal disposable
Excess liquidity at the
incomes are weaker incomes are weaker
top, who marginally
consume less
25
…and other mysteries
Large global supply shocks
26
A small open economy like the UK is exposed to global shocks
27
Global and supply factors are key drivers of inflation
Monetary policy Inflationary dynamics Central Bank toolkits
focus has been on can differ when inflation need to assess and
domestic and demand- is driven by global and respond to the drivers of
driven price dynamics in supply side factors inflation in real time amid
recent decades and over less developed global
Example, global prices
the last few years global and supply side
transmitting through
and supply factors have modelling and data
longer supply chains
seen a resurgence
28
Global price shocks manifest in "domestic" inflation metrics
Chart 12: Evolution of cost component contributions to inflation measures
Cost decomposition of the CPI basket (LHS) and of CPI measures (RHS) (a)
29
Global price shocks manifest in "domestic" inflation metrics
Chart 12: Evolution of cost component contributions to inflation measures
Cost decomposition of the CPI basket (LHS) and of CPI measures (RHS) (a)
30
Global price shocks manifest in "domestic" inflation metrics
Chart 12: Evolution of cost component contributions to inflation measures
Cost decomposition of the CPI basket (LHS) and of CPI measures (RHS) (a)
31
Energy and imports are key contributors to inflationary dynamics
…and other mysteries
A new world economic order
Brexit was the first major reset of trade relations. Sterling depreciated. Import
cost increases – outputs and inputs – caused real wage stagnation till 2019.
Minute-by-minute sterling depreciation on the Headline inflation rose, particularly in food
night of the Brexit referendum (Costa et al. 2022) (De Lyon, Dhingra and Machin 2017)
34
Brexit was the first major reset of trade relations. Sterling depreciated. Import
cost increases – outputs and inputs – caused real wage stagnation till 2019.
Minute-by-minute sterling depreciation on the Real wage growth in sectors more and less exposed
night of the Brexit referendum (Costa et al. 2022) to the sterling depreciation through imported inputs
Belo edian epreciation A ove edian epreciation
35
UK goods exports to the EU fell after Brexit
Goods exports of small firms (quintile 1 by initial employment) to EU fell relative to exports to the rest of the
world (Freeman et al. 2025), but not necessarily in ways that were expected at the outset.
36
UK services exports to the EU fell due to Brexit barriers
Services exports of the UK to the EU fell in services affected by Brexit barriers relative to bilateral exports of
other countries (Bhalotia et al. 2025), despite broad strength in services exports worldwide.
Chart 6: Services sectors facing Brexit barriers saw trade with the EU decline
Relative effect of barriers on UK exports to the EU
37
Brexit effects are large in firm surveys, so likely not just working
through trade effects
Chart 8: Brexit reduced firms’ investment and the economy’s productivity
Estimated impact on investment (LHS) and whole-economy productivity (RHS) (%)
38
The dog that has barked: Financial services exports have dipped
Banks in the UK that had passporting rights before Brexit had 80% less loans to EEA, relative to other banks
(Bhalotia et al. 2025)
Chart 7: Loss of passporting for UK banks has been a drag on EEA loan activity
Event study estimates (a)
39
The US is back to Smoot-Hawley tariffs and trade policy has
become more restrictive in recent years
40
C
U
h
S
a
a
r t
v
1
e
:
r a
T
g
r
e
a d
e
e
f f e
p
c
o
t i
l
v
i c
e
y
t a
h
r
a
i f f
s
(
b
l e
e
f t
c
)
o
(
m
%
e
) a
m
n
o
d
r
t
e
r a
r
d
e
e
s t
p
r
o
i c
l i
t
c
i
y
v e
a c
i n
t i o
r
n
e
s
c e
t a
n
k
t
e
y
n
e
g
a
l
r
o
s
b a l l y ( r i g h t )
Effects of US-China tariffs on imports from China differed across
countries, and we can draw lessons from this experience
Chart 10: Diversion to the EU is larger than to the UK
41
Mind the Gap(s)
Research must step in to bridge evidence
gaps that distort policy and skew narratives
42
