Bank of England Page 1
A feature not a bug −
speech by Megan Greene
Given at the National Institute of Economic and Social Research
24 June 2025
Bank of England Page 2
Speech
Introduction
Many thanks for inviting me to NIESR for this speech. I have spent many hours in this
building, contributing to regular discussions previously as a market participant and
attending board meetings for Rebuilding Macroeconomics when it was based here. It’s
lovely to be back in this setting.
Social scientists like to talk about structural changes, and my speech today is no
exception. I’m going to use it to explore one of the most important – and often
overlooked - structural changes happening in macroeconomic policy at the moment: the
shift of central bank balance sheets towards new steady states and what this means for
monetary policy specifically.
The size and composition of central bank balance sheets can provoke “passionate
reactions” as Andrew Hauser, the former Executive Director of Markets at the Bank, once
noted (Hauser, 2019). Perhaps this is not surprising given how crucial a role the central
bank balance sheet plays in the functioning of our financial system and economy and how
dramatically various central bank balance sheets have changed over the last decade.
During the Global Financial Crisis, as rates fell to their effective lower bounds, major
central banks turned to more unconventional policy tools, such as Quantitative Easing
(QE), to stimulate lending and spending in the economy in order to meet their inflation
targets. This led to a significant expansion in many central bank balance sheets. Additional
shocks such as Covid prompted further rounds of asset purchases over the following
decade, leaving the size of balance sheets at historically elevated levels.
Following Covid, most major central banks began to slowly shrink their balance sheets – a
process known as Quantitative Tightening (QT)1 – as seen in Figure 1.
1 The US Federal Reserve also conducted QT from 2017-2019.
Bank of England Page 3
Figure 1: Central bank assets as a share of national/regional GDP
Per cent (%) (a)
Source: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations. Latest data point is June 2025.
(a) Daily data has been transformed into monthly averages.
But how central banks have undergone the transition towards smaller balance sheets,
what the end states will look like, and what facilities are used to support interest rate
control and financial stability is not uniform. I’d like to explore some of these differences.
First, I aim to talk through the theory behind different end states and why many paths lead
to the same destination. Next, I’ll review what central banks have actually been doing,
focusing on the Bank of England (BoE), the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Federal
Reserve (Fed). To be clear, this is not an exhaustive list of central banks undergoing this
transition; I’ve simply chosen them for their impact on the UK economy.
Finally, I’d like to ask whether there are any pricing differentials that create trading
opportunities for banks given the differences in how the Bank of England, ECB and Fed
are managing their balance sheets. To be clear, I am examining this purely through the
lens of monetary policy implementation: do financial arbitrage opportunities impact central
banks’ abilities to implement monetary policy? When I refer to arbitrage today, I do not
mean the academic economic definition of a risk-free trade. I am referring to banks taking
profits from trading opportunities.
Bank of England Page 4
At the Bank of England, the day-to-day management of the balance sheet, including the
design and implementation of balance sheet operations, lies with the Bank’s
Executive – which includes the Governor and Deputy Governors – and not the
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC). But our remit on the MPC is to set monetary policy to
“maintain price stability; and subject to that, to support the economic policy of
His Majesty’s Government, including its objectives for growth and employment.”2 That
requires having sufficient control of instruments impacting monetary conditions – broadly
defined as the quantity of inside money and general level of market interest rates3
(hereafter referred to as ‘rate control’). These will be impacted by, among other things,
developments in our balance sheet and spillovers from abroad.
My main message today is that different end states for central bank balance sheets may,
at face value, create financial arbitrage opportunities for banks, but they are fairly limited.
Financial arbitrage opportunities present incentives for banks to participate in our facilities,
enhancing rather than undermining our ability to maintain rate control. This is a feature, not
a bug.
Now that I’ve given you my thesis statement, let me walk you through some of the theory
behind central bank balance sheet frameworks.
Theoretical frameworks
There’s an extensive body of literature detailing the theory underpinning monetary policy
frameworks, going back to the seminal work of William Poole (1968), in which he
analysed the choice central banks faced between targeting the interest rate or the supply
of reserves. But fear not – I won’t take you on a long journey through economic history
today. I’m going to draw on Annette Vissing-Jorgensen’s (2023) recent work to help
illustrate not only what options are available to central banks for their steady-state balance
sheet frameworks, but also why these different frameworks can all be effective at
achieving rate control.
The starting point here is understanding the role that central bank reserves play in the
financial system. Reserves are deposits that commercial banks hold at the central bank.
They are considered the most liquid form of money; they act as the ultimate means of
settlement for transactions in the economy; and they are only created by the central bank.
2 See Monetary policy remit: Mansion House 2024.
3 Principles of engagement - Governance of the Bank of England's balance sheet: principles of
engagement | Bank of England. In practice, the MPC intends to use Bank Rate as its active policy tool when
adjusting the stance of monetary policy. The parameters of the QT strategy are amended at a lower frequency
than decisions on Bank Rate and are not calibrated with a view to fine-tuning the monetary policy stance
(August 2024 Monetary Policy Report).
Bank of England Page 5
There are three main reasons commercial banks would want – and need – to hold them
(Hauser, 2023).
First, banks are mandated to hold a certain amount of liquid assets, known as ‘High
Quality Liquid Assets’ (HQLA) – of which central bank reserves are one form – to ensure
they can meet the payment obligations created by their customers at all times. Second,
banks may choose to hold additional reserves to meet higher-than-expected demand,
including outflows in periods of stress. Third, banks may wish to hold additional reserves in
excess of their precautionary needs or lend them to other banks if these options are
financially attractive.
We can formalise these options in a general and simplified way using the economist’s
favourite tool: the supply and demand diagram - as shown in Figure 2. This figure is a
stylised example rather than a representation of any one central bank’s specific approach.
Figure 2: Stylised reserves supply and demand diagram(a)
(a) Note: adaptation from Visseng-Jorgensen (2023). In this chart, I have simplified such that the IOR and
target market interest rate effectively act as floors for the demand curve. In practice, there might be some
demand for reserves below the IOR from participants who are not eligible for a deposit account at the central
bank (so-called ‘leaky floor’).
The starting assumption here is that the supply of reserves and interest paid on reserves
(IOR) are both set exogenously by the central bank. Supply is therefore fixed and
Bank of England Page 6
unaffected by the interest rate in this stylised framework. You can see this in Figure 2
represented by the straight, vertical orange lines. An expansion in the supply of reserves is
demonstrated by an outward shift of the supply curve – for instance, from Supply 1 to
Supply 2 – while a reduction in supply is represented by a movement in the opposite
direction.
The demand curve, shown in aqua, illustrates the amount of reserves demanded by
commercial banks at any given interest rate. The short–term market interest rate is
determined by the intersection of the supply and demand curves.
There are a couple of things to note about the demand curve. First, the level of the IOR
influences the level of the demand curve. Any change in the IOR leads to a vertical shift in
the demand curve, moving the market to a new equilibrium interest rate. For example, as
the IOR increases, reserves become more attractive as a store of value so the whole
demand curve shifts up. It is also worth noting that the spread between the IOR and the
market interest rate matters since it impacts the opportunity cost of holding reserves and
therefore influences how many reserves banks choose to hold.
Second, the demand curve is downward sloping in nature - as is typically the case for
goods, services and other assets. As their price – or their market rate – falls, banks
demand more of them.
But there are two more specific reasons for this. First, as banks hold more reserves, the
convenience benefits they get from holding extra reserves – notably that they are already
in the form of the settlement asset, and are more convenient than monetising other, less
liquid assets – diminishes so they are willing to pay less of a so-called ‘convenience yield’
for them. Second, as market rates go up relative to the IOR, banks face a higher
opportunity cost: banks benefit more from lending out funds to other banks or using them
to invest in other assets, rather than holding on to them in the form of reserves and
earning the IOR (and vice versa).
A final note on the demand curve is that it is non-linear. As reserves increase, the demand
curve becomes flatter until demand for reserves is fully satiated and the demand curve is
completely horizontal. Here, any change in supply has no impact on the market rate since
reserves are so abundant. On the other hand, as reserves become less abundant, the
demand curve becomes steeper and market rates become increasingly more responsive
to changes in supply (Afonso et al, 2024).
Now that we’ve covered the basics, let’s take a look at some options for a framework that
central banks can choose to set their market rate. Our supply and demand diagram shows
two distinct approaches to achieving the same target market interest rate: Point A and
Point B.
Bank of England Page 7
At point A, the central bank has set a low IOR (IOR1), resulting in a low reserve demand
curve (Demand 1), and has chosen to supply a scarce amount of reserves. With this
approach, the central bank is able to create the conditions for its target market interest
rate. However, in committing to a scarce reserve framework, the market rate is susceptible
to volatility, given the equilibrium lies on the steep part of the demand curve. Here, even
small shifts in supply and demand can lead to a considerable change in the market interest
rate.
Alternatively, the central bank can achieve the same market interest rate at Point B. In this
particular regime, the central bank makes use of a higher IOR (IOR2), resulting in a higher
demand curve (Demand 2), and at the same time provides an abundant level of reserves.
As such, demand is satiated, the demand curve is relatively flat and there is little scope for
volatility in the market rate. The consequence of the central bank’s choices here is that
given its interest rate control target and its objectives, it has chosen to remunerate the
reserves at a higher interest rate IOR2 and consistent with that it must provide a larger
number of reserves.
The examples I’ve used – A and B – are relative extremes in regimes where central banks
aim to set supply and influence demand. In theory, and absent any other restrictions, the
central bank can achieve the same market interest rate using a plethora of combinations of
reserve supply and IOR. For this reason, we see a variety of different frameworks
implemented at different times in the real world.
Prior to the GFC, reserves were generally scarcer and central banks used regular open
market operations (OMOs) to fine tune the supply of reserves to keep short-term money
market rates aligned with the policy rate. Within these systems, market rates fluctuated
within a ‘corridor’, with facilities setting the floors – as defined by the IORs in
Figure 2 – and ceilings for rates.
The sharp economic downturn accompanying the GFC necessitated a historic reduction in
interest rates, and most major central banks quickly approached their effective lower
bounds. As a result, many central banks engaged in large-scale asset
purchases – primarily government bonds – known as quantitative easing. To pay for these
assets, central banks created reserves. These reserves became liabilities on the central
bank balance sheet, mirroring the newly acquired assets - as illustrated in the stylised
central bank balance sheet (Figure 3) below.
Bank of England Page 8
Figure 3: Stylised central bank balance sheet (a)
a) Note that in this simplified illustration, assets on the RHS do not necessarily represent the backing asset
for the corresponding liabilities on the LHS.
As reserves became abundant, this pushed market rates lower. In order to effectively
implement monetary policy, the policy rate acted as a floor to – and target for – market
rates and we entered a decade where central banks used these ‘floor systems’.
The forceful actions taken by central banks in response to Covid expanded their balance
sheets further, reaching historically elevated levels. This is shown for the UK in Figure 4.
Bank of England Page 9
Figure 4: The Bank of England’s balance sheet as a share of nominal GDP
Per cent (%) (a)
Source: Bank of England, ONS and Bank calculations. Latest data point is 2024.
(a) Consolidated balance sheet as a percentage of lagged nominal GDP based on GB and NI definition.
Data up to and including 2018 taken from “Annual data on the Bank of England’s balance sheet” dataset.
Data including 2019 and onwards is taken from the Bank of England’s Annual Reports and Accounts and the
ONS. Therefore, care should be taken when comparing over the time series.
Following Covid, many central banks began reducing their balance sheets. There are a
number of benefits to this. For example, it reduces the risk of the balance sheet ratcheting
higher in size, and thus increases the headroom for the central bank to be able to use its
balance sheet in the future if needed in support of its remit (Bailey et al., 2020). Most
central banks have been doing this through passive roll-off (allowing assets to come to
maturity without reinvesting), but the Bank of England has also engaged in active sales.
This is largely because the UK government bonds we purchased had, on average, a
longer maturity than our peers so unwinding the balance sheet by relying on passive
roll–off alone would have taken much longer. Passive roll-off would have also involved a
lumpy profile of sales, so active QT has allowed us to smoothen this out.
This move away from an environment of abundant reserves, which has been the status
quo for over a decade, represents a significant transition for central banks. And as with
any transition, it carries some risk. As we get closer to the minimum level of reserves
required by commercial banks without causing them to bid up money market rates, central
banks have laid out their plans for what their respective steady-state frameworks will look
like. As mentioned, there is a whole range of frameworks between abundant and scarce
reserves that can in theory ensure effective interest rate control.
Bank of England Page 10
But there are two main considerations central banks need to take into account when
determining the likely end state for their balance sheets. First, we cannot observe the
minimum range of reserves – known at the Bank of England as the preferred minimum
range of reserves (PMRR) – so while we have estimates for where it might be, these are
uncertain and this number changes over time.4 Second, policymakers will need to ensure
a new monetary framework does not jeopardise financial stability objectives. In practice,
this likely means not going back too far to the left in Figure 2 – into the territory of scarce
reserves. Put together, the optimal framework is likely to have ample reserves, but less
abundant than the levels observed in the period after QE (Saporta, 2025).
Steady-state balance sheets across Central Banks
With some theory under our belts, I’d like to explore how central banks have been
transitioning to their new steady states and what steady-state frameworks they’ve chosen.
I’ll focus on three major central banks – the Bank of England, the ECB and the Fed.
Figure 5 outlines the journeys and destinations for these three central banks. As you can
see, the Bank of England and ECB have chosen relatively similar steady-state frameworks
– with a demand-driven floor – while the Fed has opted for a supply–driven framework. I’ll
briefly outline each of these frameworks in turn and how they can ultimately help to
achieve similar interest rate outcomes, starting with the Bank’s.
Figure 5: An overview of current QT policy settings across major central banks(a)
(a) BoE current pace assumes even distribution of the Sep 2024 – Sep 2025 £100bn envelope across
quarters for simplification.
Sources: Bank of England, Federal Reserve, European Central Bank.
4 The latest survey conducted asking banks what their preferred minimum range of reserves is suggests that
the PMRR is £385-540bn, marginally higher than £385-530bn in Q3 2024 (Saporta, 2025)
Bank of England Page 11
The Bank of England
The Bank of England began passively unwinding its balance sheet in early 2022 before
also actively selling gilts later that year.
As reserves become scarcer, the risk of volatility in short term market rates rises, as I
outlined earlier. To avoid this, the Bank introduced the Short-Term Repo facility (STR).
This repo facility allows commercial banks to borrow an unlimited amount of reserves at
Bank Rate for a 7-day term. In exchange, they must offer up high-quality collateral (such
as Gilts), using this to bid on reserves at weekly auctions.5 This facility ensures that money
market rates do not rise too far above Bank Rate, since banks could then borrow reserves
at cheaper rates from the Bank than in the market. Another repo facility, the Indexed
Long-Term Repo Facility (ILTR),6 will play an increasing role to complement the STR in
providing the stock of reserves.
In practice, this requires operational readiness of the Bank and commercial banks to
ensure these facilities are used effectively and seamlessly. Indeed, the increasing usage
of repo facilities over the past year as money market rates have stayed relatively close to
Bank Rate, as is shown in Figure 6, goes some way to demonstrating this is the case.
As QT reduces reserves, the Bank expects a growing share of reserves to be backed by
its repo operations. Once reserves fall to the level of banks’ “true” demand – the so–called
PMRR – we expect banks – in aggregate – to replace any reserves lost due to the
unwinding of QE and TFSME7 roll–off by participating in our repo operations. At that point,
the aggregate quantity of reserves will be repo-led and demand-driven. The Bank’s regular
repo facilities will help to ensure short-term market interest rates remain aligned to Bank
Rate, maintaining the effective transmission of monetary policy.
5 A haircut applies to this collateral, so the effective rate paid on the facility is slightly above Bank Rate.
Borrowed reserves are then paid back a week later and the collateral is returned.
6 For more detail, see Using the ILTR: a guide for participants (June 2025).
7 Term Funding Scheme with additional incentives for SMEs (TFSME) was a scheme introduced during the
Covid crisis, which offered four-year funding at or very close to Bank Rate to eligible banks and building
societies to reinforce the transmission of the reduction in Bank Rate and support lending to the real economy,
particularly to SMEs.
Bank of England Page 12
Figure 6: STR and ILTR usage (LHS) & Overnight secured and unsecured rates as
spreads to Bank Rate (RHS)
£ billions (a) Basis points (b)
Source: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations. Latest data point is 19/06/2025.
(a) LHS shows stock outstanding.
(b) Prior to 2006, the Bank ran an operationally intensive framework of multiple daily operations to supply a
small number of large commercial banks with just enough reserves to settle intra-day payments and the
overall supply of reserves was extremely low compared to today. In 2006, the framework of reserves
averaging was introduced by the Bank. In this framework, the Bank started to pay interest on reserves, which
incentivised banks to hold positive reserve balances. As well as this, this framework had two main elements:
voluntary reserves targets set by participants themselves, and weekly lending operations. (Saporta, 2025).
Spread is calculated as RONIA or SONIA minus Bank Rate.
The ECB
The ECB began shrinking its balance sheet in 2022, later than the Bank of England but the
pace has been swift.
The ECB has taken a passive approach to QT, allowing expired holdings to roll off across
its QE portfolios including the Asset Purchase Programme (APP)8 and the Pandemic
Emergency Purchase Programme (PEPP). Despite these reductions in the ECB’s QT
portfolios, the majority of the roll-off in the balance sheet has so far stemmed from
repayments of the ECB's targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) – see
Figure 7.
8 Consists of four separate programmes: the Corporate Sector Purchase Programme (CSPP), Public Sector
Purchase Programme (PSPP), Asset-Backed Securities Programme (ABSPP) and Third Covered Bond
Purchase Programme (CB3PP3).
Bank of England Page 13
Figure 7: TLTRO III repayments lead the ECB’s balance sheet unwind
€ billions (a)
Source: European Central Bank and Bank calculations. Latest data point is May 2025.
(a) TLTRO is Targeted Longer-term Refinancing Operations; PEPP is the Pandemic Emergency Purchase
Programme; and APP is Asset Purchase Programmes.
Policymakers have highlighted that even with balance sheet roll offs, liquidity remains
ample in the eurozone for the time being (Schnabel, 2024).
In order to keep control of money market rates, the ECB aims to transition in a
“measured and predictable way” (Cipollone, 2025) to a demand-driven system9 with a soft
floor in steady state, whereby the marginal unit of reserves is supplied by standard
refinancing operations. Within this framework, in a similar spirit to the Bank, the ECB uses
a variety of facilities to keep money market rates anchored to its target rate (the Deposit
Facility Rate), including the Main Refinancing Operations (MRO) and Marginal Lending
Facility (MLF)10 – see Figure 8.
9 As characterised by Schnabel (2024).
10 Looking further out, the ECB plans to introduce structural longer-term credit operations and a structural
portfolio of securities (Buch and Schnabel, 2025).
Bank of England Page 14
Figure 8: Euro area money market rates (LHS) and DFR-Euro-STR spread (RHS)
Per cent(a) Basis points(b)
Source: European Central Bank and Bank calculations. Latest data point is for 20/06/2025 for Euro-STR and
23/06/2025 for all other rates.
(a) MLF is the Marginal Lending Facility rate; MRO is the Main Refinancing Operations rate; DFR is the
Deposit Facility Rate. The Euro Short-Term rate replaced the Euro Overnight Index Average (EONIA),
which was discontinued on 3 January 2022.
(b) Spread is calculated as Deposit Facility Rate minus Euro-Short Term Rate.
While these facilities have existed in previous regimes too, one of the main changes in this
new system – and what differentiates this system from the Bank’s steady–state
demand-driven framework – is the pricing of standing weekly repo facilities. The ECB
prices both its short-term (MRO) and long–term repo (LTRO) at the same rate, currently
15bps above the deposit rate,11 and the pricing does not depend on the collateral posted.
In contrast, the Bank prices its short–term repo (STR) at the policy rate, with a haircut
applied to collateral, but allows the price of the longer-term repo (ILTR) to be set higher
depending on how much participants bid and what collateral they post.12
The Federal Reserve
The Fed was the first amongst these three central banks to shrink its balance sheet via
passive roll–off from 2017, though this was halted after volatility in money markets in 2019.
The current round of normalisation began in June 2022, though the pace of passive
11 The ECB has reduced the spread on its MROs from 50bps to 15bps as it wants to incentivise greater
usage of these weekly operations, while limiting volatility in short-term money market rates. At the same
time, the ECB argues that a spread of 15bps will leave room for money market activity and provide
incentives for banks to seek market-based funding solutions.
12 The ECB supplies reserves at a constant price (15bps above deposit rate) and does not depend on
collateral (not accounting for haircuts). The BoE STR also supplies reserves at a constant price (Bank Rate,
ignoring the haircut on collateral) but only Level A collateral is eligible. Meanwhile, supply in the ILTR will
vary with demand and with the type of collateral – with level A and B starting below the ECB price, and Level
C at 15bps.
Bank of England Page 15
unwind has since been adjusted lower as the Fed approaches the level of reserves it
intends to supply in its supply-driven framework.13 As the Fed's security holdings (the aqua
line in Figure 9) decline, the Overnight Reverse Repo (ONRRP) has accounted for the bulk
of the shrinkage in Fed liabilities, unsurprising given these are the most rate–sensitive
funds and the facility is intended as a backstop tool (Logan, 2024).
Figure 9: The ONRRP has borne the brunt of the Fed’s balance sheet unwind
Change in $ billions(a)
Source: FRED and Bank calculations. Latest data point is for 11/06/2025.
(a) ONRRP is the Fed’s Overnight Reverse Repo Facility; TGA is the Treasury General Account.
Unlike the BoE and ECB, which target policy rates, the Fed explicitly specifies a target
range, rather than a single rate known as the Effective Federal Funds Rate. To keep the
Effective Federal Funds Rate within a controlled channel, it uses Interest on Reserve
Balances (IORB) to act as a floor for market rates.
Admittedly, these market rates have fallen more markedly below the IORB during periods
when liquidity has increased to excessive levels, as shown by the spread between the
Effective Federal Funds Rate and the IORB in Figure 10. This is often attributed partly to
the presence of significant lenders who cannot earn IORB on their balances at the central
bank and so are willing to lend reserves at a lower rate than the IORB.14
13 $60bn per month initially before slowing to $25bn per month and now to $5bn per month from April 2025.
14 Entities that are not depository institutions ie, banks, typically cannot access IORB. This includes Federal
Home Loan Banks, money market mutual funds and Government Sponsored Enterprises. This constitutes a
“leakage” in the system. Therefore, the ONRRP, which qualified firms can utilise, makes use of a rate slightly
below the IORB (Chien and Stewart, 2024) and ensures that money market rates do not consistently fall
10bps below the IORB (Afonso et al., 2022).
Bank of England Page 16
To reinforce the IORB as a floor, the Fed introduced the Overnight Reverse Repo
(ONRRP), which is set at a slightly lower rate and open to a broader set of counterparties
beyond depository institutions. This effectively acts as a backstop to ensure that rates do
not fall too far below the IORB in periods where there is excessive liquidity. This ‘corridor’
between the IORB and ONRRP rates allows the Fed to manage day to day fluctuations in
the Federal Funds market.
Finally, the Fed uses a Standing Repo Facility (SRF) to supply liquidity to prevent market
rates going too high – effectively acting as a cap of sorts as institutions can always borrow
cash from the Fed at that rate.15 Banks can also access liquidity from the discount window,
though use of this facility has a stigma attached to it.16
Figure 10: US money market rates (LHS) and EFFR-IORB spread (RHS)
Per cent (%) Basis points(b)
Source: FRED and Bank calculations. Latest data point is for 17/06/2025.
(a) EFFR is the Effective Federal Funds Rate; IORB is the Interest on Reserve Balances; and ONRRP is the
Overnight Reverse Repo Rate. The IORB replaced two separate rates on 29 July 2021 – namely, the
Interest on Excess Reserves and the Interest on Required Reserve Balances.
(b) Spread is calculated as the Interest on Reserves Balance Rate minus the Effective Federal Funds Rate.
15 The minimum bid rate for the SRF is currently set at 4.5%, which is equal to the top of the FOMC's target
range for the Effective Federal Funds Rate (for more, see FAQs: Standing Repo Facility). Eligible collateral
includes US Treasuries, agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, with a range of haircuts applied
to collateral (for more, see Repo Securities Schedule).
16 The pricing and terms for the Fed's Discount Window varies by the lending program in question: the Primary
Credit program is available to "generally sound depository institutions" at a rate equal to the top of the FOMC
target range for the Effective Federal Funds Rate. The Secondary Credit program is available for depository
institutions that do not qualify for primary credit and is priced at the primary credit rate plus 50bp (for more,
see The Primary and Secondary Lending Programs). The range of eligible collateral for the discount window
is wider than the SRF, with higher haircuts applied to most forms of collateral under the Secondary Credit
program (for more, see Collateral Valuation).
Bank of England Page 17
In steady state, the Fed aims to supply an ample level of reserves somewhere between an
abundant level of reserves and the level demanded by counterparties. Reserves supplied
above what the system needs implies that the Fed will remain on the relatively flat part of
the reserves demand curve (Figure 2). In theory, this means money market rates should
be within the FOMC’s target range without the need for regular use of central bank liquidity
facilities to actively manage reserve supply. Still, the SRF and discount window are in
place as a release valve for when there are pockets of illiquidity in markets (Logan, 2025).
This is different from the Bank and the ECB, for which these ceiling tools are intended to
be used for regular liquidity management.
Implications for financial arbitrage and monetary policy
So far, I’ve discussed the different approaches to balance sheet normalisation being taken
by the Bank of England, ECB and Fed. In steady state, these major central banks will offer
lending facilities to market participants that operate differently.
A natural question therefore is whether this generates price differentials across markets
that create trading opportunities for global banks operating in all these jurisdictions? I am
referring to these opportunities here as arbitrage. If there are arbitrage opportunities, do I
need to care as a member of the MPC; does this have implications for monetary policy
implementation?
In short, the scope for arbitrage exists but appears limited. Most importantly, it doesn’t
undermine monetary policy implementation, but rather strengthens it.
I’ll begin by considering why one might think the transition away from abundant reserves to
new regimes may bring more arbitrage opportunities.
First, there are more tools and facilities being introduced by central banks in demand-
driven systems. In these systems, banks operating in different jurisdictions will need to
directly access facilities operated by multiple central banks, and these will have different
pricing and eligibility requirements. This may, in turn, create opportunities for some form of
arbitrage.
For example, the Bank and the ECB both intend for their market-wide repo facilities to be
used as part of regular liquidity management, but they are priced differently. The BoE’s
STR is priced at Bank Rate – with an estimated all-in cost of around 5-10bps above Bank
Rate once one accounts for the cost of haircuts on collateral (Saporta, 2025) – while its
longer-term facility has pricing that will vary according to demand. The ECB prices both its
Bank of England Page 18
short and long-term repo at 15bps above the deposit rate – and with different collateral
eligibility to the BoE.17
These discrepancies in pricing could in theory create an opportunity for global banks,
present in both markets, to benefit through trades – making use of multiple central bank
facilities. The potential for these mismatches may also be higher since there is likely to be
greater volatility in money market rates given liquidity needs will need to be more actively
managed rather than satiated by an abundance of reserves.
Second, different choices in frameworks for managing money market rates will also result
in differences in pricing. Once all systems are in steady state, the theory would suggest
that we’re likely to see short-term market rates as a spread to the policy rate settle
differently depending on whether the supply of reserves is lower or higher. Indeed, this is
illustrated by points A and B in Figure 2, which show that – for a given set of
assumptions – the IOR set by central banks would be higher relative to the policy rate in a
system with more abundant reserves versus one with less abundant reserves.
A global bank could, at face value, trade fluctuations in the differential between these two
spreads created by different systems. For example, if there were a shock causing euro
area money market rates to fall significantly below the ECB’s deposit rate, a tactical
arbitrage opportunity could arise. The bank could borrow at the more favourable euro area
money market rate, convert this into sterling via FX swaps, hedge the FX market risk, and
then place this money into a reserves account at the Bank of England to earn interest at
Bank Rate.
These are some ways in which arbitrage opportunities might emerge. Now I will lay out
why, both in theory and in practice, these opportunities for arbitrage are not new per se,
will likely be limited in scope and actually act as a feature in supporting rate control.
Arbitrage is an intrinsic and essential part of financial markets generally: it’s what ensures
assets are priced fairly and efficiently. And while frictions – such as some forms of
regulation and transaction costs – mean that prices of assets may not perfectly adjust to
what might be considered their ‘fair value’, financial markets are generally effective in
reflecting the latest and most full set of information, correcting what might be considered
‘mispricing’ over the medium–term.
Opportunities for arbitrage exist across all asset classes, and also across central bank
facilities. This could be one reason hedge funds have played an increasingly prominent
role in QE and QT auctions in the UK (Kaminska et al., 2025) as they intermediate
secondary bond markets – a trend that is visible across all major sovereign bond markets.
17 See footnote 12 for more detail.
Bank of England Page 19
I also note that firms have always benefited from different pricing across jurisdictions,
including in the recent period of abundant reserves. After all, they can earn interest by
holding reserves at central banks, so global banks have an incentive to move cash to take
profits on their location whenever a profitable FX basis arises between sterling, the US
dollar and the euro. If it’s profitable to shift money18 across jurisdictions once accounting
for the cost of exchanging and hedging the currencies and other constraints (such as
regulation or stigma), banks will do so. It’s very difficult to disentangle this in the data and
provide specific evidence, but we should assume that if banks have an opportunity to
make an attractive risk-adjusted return, they are likely to embrace it.
Still, opportunities for arbitrage are limited. If pricing differentials created opportunities
across jurisdictions that led to firms swapping currencies to take advantage of this, one
would expect exchange rate markets to adjust and remove this opportunity. In essence,
this is macro 101: according to the covered interest rate parity condition (CIP), forward
exchange rates adjust to remove the potential for arbitrage. If it were still profitable for a
bank to take advantage of pricing in another jurisdiction’s central bank facilities, even after
accounting for exchange rate differentials, then one would expect the relative cost of
borrowing and lending currencies – known as cross-currency basis – to adjust and act as a
secondary means of absorbing any return.
Admittedly, frictions and regulatory frameworks in these markets may prevent this
adjustment from being immediate or full, but they should reduce the opportunity for
arbitrage and ensure that deviations of exchange rates from the standard CIP framework
are temporary and therefore not relevant for me as a monetary policymaker with a
medium-term time horizon.
Nuances underlying the headline pricing of different central bank facilities may also limit
the scope for arbitrage. For instance, the different haircuts applied to collateral used in
these facilities may outweigh the differences in the effective cost of using different
facilities. And, looking ahead, it is worth noting that the pricing of and eligibility for these
facilities could change in the future. After all, this pricing is currently calibrated to the
current state of transition and could change once central banks reach their desired steady
states. Indeed, as my colleague Vicky Saporta (2025) set out recently in the context of
our own approach, central banks are likely to learn by doing. Therefore, the scope and
magnitude for arbitrage opportunities might change in the future.
Finally, the willingness of banks to identify and act on pricing differentials is a feature of
our system, not a bug.
After all, the usage of our facilities – whether it be for arbitrage opportunities or for other
liquidity purposes – is crucial for controlling rates in short–term money markets and
18 Note: we are not referring here to reserves, which cannot be shifted between central banks.
Bank of England Page 20
ensuring that they do not drift too far from the policy rate. Floor and corridor systems only
work because central bank facilities provide incentives for banks to participate in them as
part of the money market – and the presence of arbitrage opportunities can provide one
such incentive.
This control of short-term rates is essential in ensuring the transmission of monetary policy
is not distorted and can be used effectively to ensure price stability, which is my primary
objective as an MPC member. This is especially important in the current context, since it
ensures we can continue to undergo QT without the risk of losing monetary control on the
way to and after the PMRR is reached.
The recent experience in the UK provides me with additional confidence that monetary
policy implementation should be unaffected by this going forward. After all, there has been
a welcome reduction in stigma associated with our repo facilities and a pickup in their
usage; our facilities are very much “open for business”. Money market rates have been
relatively contained, with limited volatility and no obvious distortions in relative pricing
across jurisdictions.
All of this leaves me with the space to focus on being able to set monetary policy – which
is all the better since there’s plenty to think about on that front at the moment too.
Monetary policy views
There is a significant amount of uncertainty both domestically and globally, and we’ve
used scenarios to help us think through risks around our outlook. I’d like to take a few
minutes to discuss what I think the key risks are.
The main messages for me remain the same: underlying activity is weak, the labour
market has loosened further and the disinflationary process continues, albeit with an
elevated plateau of inflation around 3.5% for the second half of this year.
I’m worried about both the demand and the supply sides of the economy. On the demand
side, we assume a recovery in output to nearly 2% over the forecast period, driven by a
pick-up in consumption and corresponding fall in the savings ratio. I’m not sure this will
materialise. As I set out in a previous speech (Greene, 2024), mortgages resetting at
higher rates are likely to continue to weigh on consumption even as interest rates are on a
downward trajectory. And I expect precautionary savings will rise – not drop – as the
labour market softens further. All else equal, this would be disinflationary.
On the supply side, both headline and underlying productivity growth have fallen
considerably. We expect a sharp recovery in productivity growth over the forecast period,
almost back to the 1% trend. I believe the risks to this are firmly to the downside. This
could be exacerbated by recent trade policy developments. Trade policy uncertainty is
Bank of England Page 21
likely to remain a drag on business investment for some time to come as firms delay
long-term decisions about capital allocation. Supply chain disruptions from tariffs could
also serve as a negative supply shock. All else equal, these developments would be
inflationary.
But trade policy could be disinflationary as well. Since the Liberation Day turbulence last
round, signals on trade policy have broadly been positive, including UK trade deals with
the US and India (and an agreement for closer cooperation with the EU) and a skeleton for
a US-China trade deal. Still, if countries can no longer export to the US market as
profitably because of US tariffs, they might seek to drop prices for goods exports to gain
access to other markets, such as the UK. So far there is nascent evidence of trade
diversion or re-routing from China, with goods export volumes to the US falling from April
2025 but rising to the UK, EU and particularly to ASEAN. Trade uncertainty has fallen back
from April to May in line with our expectations, but I don’t think we realistically have much
more certainty about trade policy now than we did in May. I still expect trade policy to have
a net disinflationary impact on the UK, but it may be muted relative to my expectations in
May, when it was a factor in my decision to cut Bank Rate.
Meanwhile, the labour market has eased roughly in line with our expectations. A margin of
slack seems to have opened up, with vacancies dropping materially in the latest print by
7.9% and the unemployment rate picking up – as expected – to 4.6%. Additionally, we saw
the largest monthly fall in payrolls data in April 2025 in almost five years. But given the
ONS’s advice to view these estimates with caution, I place more weight on our own
estimate of underlying employment growth, which points to stagnation in hiring rather than
contraction. The corresponding picture on pay is somewhat more nuanced: so far pay
settlements have come in between 3-4%, in line with the steer we are taking from the
Agents’ pay survey and the Decision Maker Panel (DMP) for 2025. Overall, I think the
evidence points to a slowly softening labour market rather than one that is sharply
deteriorating.
Finally, I worry about the near-term profile for inflation this year, which in my view now
resembles more of a “plateau” than a “hump”. We expect inflation to resume its fall
towards our target from early next year. However, there is a risk that elevated inflation of
roughly 3.5% the rest of this year will feed through into inflation expectations, and
therefore wage and price setting behaviour. Aside from energy and regulated prices
buoying inflation, food prices have surprised consistently to the upside. Energy and food
prices are particularly salient for inflation expectation setting. Household inflation
expectations have been rising for months and are at the upper end of the band we might
expect given consumer prices. Business expectations are also elevated but are less
out-of-line with the past. I think the risk that our near-term plateau in inflation feeds through
into second round effects is skewed to the upside. This is even more a concern in light of
the escalating conflict in the Middle East, which poses upside risks to oil prices.
Bank of England Page 22
So where does this leave me on the balance of risks? I continue to think the risks remain
two-sided but skewed to the downside on growth and to the upside on inflation. This is an
uncomfortable place to be for a central banker. Given the period of elevated inflation
through which we have just come, I think price stability is the key priority. But extracting a
clear signal on this amongst increased noise and uncertainty is difficult. On the domestic
front, noisy data means that it will take longer for me to take comfort from recent
disinflationary trends. On the global front, there are a number of key events playing out
between now and our next meeting, including the deadline for the pause on so-called
“reciprocal tariffs” from the US, the potential passage of a budget in the US and the
unfolding of events in the Middle East. It’s unlikely that the uncertainty from these
events – and subsequent developments – will be resolved any time soon. I therefore think
a careful and gradual approach to removing monetary policy restrictiveness continues to
be warranted.
The views expressed in this speech are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or
the Monetary Policy Committee. All omissions and errors are my own.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Amarjot Sidhu, Waris Panjwani and Emma Hatwell for their help in the
preparation of this speech. I’d also like to thank Andrew Bailey, Huw Pill, Victoria Saporta,
Dave Ramsden, Martin Seneca, Tom Pattie, Johnny Elliot, Arif Merali, Matt Roberts–Sklar,
Michael McLeay, Finn Meinecke, Grainne McGread, Benjamin Baker, Oscar Pedreira
Sanchez, Andrew Butcher, Olga Turko, Natalie Burr, Shiv Chowla, Jack Worlidge,
Daniel Beale, Rand Fakhoury, and Daire MacFadden for their thoughtful comments and
help with data and analysis.