Bank of England Page 1
The end of the road −
speech by Alan Taylor
Given at the London School of Economics and Political Science
04 July 2025
Bank of England Page 2
Speech
Thank you for the kind introduction and the invitation to come to LSE to deliver my second
speech as a member of the Monetary Policy Committee since I joined the Bank of England
last September.
LSE is a special place in terms of its history with the Bank, going back many decades.
Since 1997 it has also been the academic home to many distinguished members of the
MPC, to name a few: Mervyn King, Charles Goodhart, Stephen Nickell, Charlie Bean,
Tim Besley, Silvana Tenreyro, and my current colleague on the Committee, Swati Dhingra.
Through their service they have all set a great example and provide inspiration for me as
just the latest professor to serve on the committee.
Now on to the speech. Or at least I think it is a speech. On re-reading it I wonder if it is a
bit more like an economics seminar—but given our location I hope I can be somewhat
forgiven for that.
1. Introduction
The meta subject of practically any speech by any monetary policymaker is
communication. However, paradoxically, in the ideal state of the world, this communication
is almost unnecessary. If everyone knows the policy reaction function, through knowledge
of the relevant data, history, and actions, then everyone can predict almost without fail the
actions you will take now, and in most future states of the world.
Now the actual subject of my speech today, given the title, is the end of the road. But if you
are now asking yourself the question, “the end of the road for what?” then I have fallen
short of that communications benchmark.
But at least it leaves me with something to talk about tonight.
To cut to the point, the end of the road that I will be speaking about is the end of the road
for Bank Rate, our main policy instrument. Also known as the end point, the neutral rate,
the rate obtained after all shocks have washed out. That destination, and how we get there
is of enormous interest and consequence to the economy, affecting financial markets,
banks, firms, households, everyone.
This raises further questions: is it really that important? And if so, where is it? I believe that
it is important, and that trying to avoid the question is hard, problematic, and in my view,
counterproductive. I argued as much in some brief remarks I gave a couple of days ago in
Sintra, and I hope to expand further on that theme today.
Bank of England Page 3
Whilst one could take a step by step, or meeting by meeting approach to guiding the
interest rate, the question of the end point, the final resting place of interest rates, in a
steady state can, in my view, never quite be fully sidestepped.
I will try to explain why that is, and then try to answer the question as directly as I can by
providing my own view, which is of course not necessarily that of my MPC colleagues.
2. Recent history: elusive stability
To start with some useful historical context, we can look at the recent path of short-term
rates, inflation, the output gap, that is, an estimate of the balance between aggregate
supply and demand, as well as an estimate of the natural rate in the UK over the last 50
years. Remember, one of the hats I wear is that of the economic historian, so 50 years ago
is very recent. We’ll be going much further back in a moment.
Chart 1: Bank Rate, inflation, the output gap, and r*
Percent
Percent
20 20
Bank Rate
15 15
CPI inflation
10 10
UK real neutral rate r*
5 5
0 0
Output gap
-5 -5
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025
Source: Office for National Statistics, Bank of England, Davis et al. (2024), and Bank calculations. Notes:
UK 𝑟∗ is an updated version of the measure in Davis et al.; the output gap until the 1990’s is constructed
using the HP-filter, then spliced with the output gap from the May 2025 Monetary Policy Report. Latest
observation: May 2025.
As Chart 1 shows, the Bank’s policy rate, Bank Rate (aqua), has been on a downward
trend for the last 50 years, notwithstanding some major fluctuations on either side of that
trend. Part of it can be attributed to the fall in the real natural rate of interest (orange)
which went from about 3% in the 1980s to near 1% now. Over that same time frame, also
inflation has come down from its 1970s highs, settling around 2%, the MPC’s target, but
with a lot of noisy fluctuations along the way.
Bank of England Page 4
The question, of course, is why these trends happened and then, where they might go
next. But that will take a few steps, and an attempt to get a handle on the underlying
economics and the relevant historical evidence.
As we can see, in this period, Bank Rate reached its highest level in 1979 and then stayed
high through the 1980s, a time when all major central banks sought to put an end to a long
inflation surge that began slowly in the 1960s and accelerated with the oil shocks of the
1970s. Inflation had been allowed to get out of control and into double digits on an annual
basis. The 10%+ inflation unleashed by too loose monetary conditions and unanchored
expectations was painful and unpopular, as was the 10%+ unemployment rate that
followed under the tight monetary conditions instituted to bring down inflation. In an
already dismal science, those years bequeathed new terms of art such as `stagflation’ and
the `misery index’—the sum of inflation and unemployment rates, which at times rose to
the 20%+ range.
Thankfully, we never saw that kind of misery index again, but the macroeconomic
aftershocks did not fully subside until around 1990, and they left a big mark on economists
and on economic policy. By the early 1990s, in a growing range of advanced economies,
we saw the emergence of the current monetary framework of inflation targeting by an
independent central bank, an idea that became the global norm and remains with us
today. Yet the period of subsequent macroeconomic calm was fleeting and would last for
barely 20 years, until 2008, a time that is wistfully referred to by macroeconomists as The
Great Moderation.
In the case of the UK, those were the ‘nice’ decades—non-inflationary, consistently
expansionary (King, 2003). In that window, inflation settled at low and stable levels,
economic growth hummed along, and policy interest rates remained on a mostly steady
course, and in a fairly stable channel. Bank Rate began this current century at a relatively
high level of 5.75%, falling to 3.5% in mid-2003 and tightening before the financial crisis in
2008. Up to that point growth was strong and inflation stable. Immediately after, however,
rates fell to near zero in early 2009. Subsequent economic growth was weak, and many
parts of the world entered a long and deep recession. In this period after the financial
crisis, UK inflation was volatile and often meaningfully above and even below target.
However, having interest rates on the floor at zero was certainly not seen as a normal level
in the long run, and interest rates in some advanced economies began to lift off in the late
2010s as economies recovered. The pandemic then hit, the economy was at risk of
collapse, rates went back to the floor, and more economic volatility followed. Central banks
supported the economy, as did fiscal measures. At the exit from the pandemic, inflation
began to rise as supply chains struggled to meet resurgent demand, and then took off after
the food and energy supply shocks triggered by the Russian invasion of Ukraine. In that
context, Bank Rate, like interest rates across the world, swung from very accommodative
Bank of England Page 5
to very restrictive, to push back against inflation dynamics and the risk of expectations
unanchoring.
In that very brief summary of events, it is pretty clear that, at least since 2008, interest
rates here in the UK as well as in other parts of the world, have hardly ever been near their
neutral level. And for good reason: the emergence of one shock after another has required
central banks to intervene resolutely first in one direction, and then in the other.
As a result, and unlike the period before 2008, it is very hard to simply look at the policy
rate itself, take some kind of average or trend, and draw any firm conviction as to where
the neutral level might be.
So, what can we do? Tonight, I will walk through the kind of analytical approach that most
macroeconomists would typically use as of now, the current best practice as I see it, and
try to explain how that guides my thinking.
3. Ancient history: four great epochs
However, I did promise a deeper dive into history, and now is a good time to do that. Not
for the sake of it, but because I think it provides us with further insights and motivation to
ponder the question of what drives interest rates today.
The history of interest rates is very long indeed1 and should prompt us to ask what key
economic mechanisms have mattered over the very long run and to think about how they
have ebbed and flowed in terms of their influence in different times and places. With those
perspectives in hand, we are in a better place to think about what might be the most
operative forces that bind on interest rates today and in the near future.
1 See Homer and Sylla, ‘A History of Interest Rates’.
Bank of England Page 6
Chart 2: Eight hundred years of interest rates
Percent
Percent
20 20
Schmelzing (2020):
Global real interestrate
15 15
10 10
5 5
0 0
50-yearcentred moving average
-5 -5
-10 -10
-15 -15
1300 1350 1400 1450 1500 1550 1600 1650 1700 1750 1800 1850 1900 1950 2000
Source: Schmelzing, 2020. Notes: The chart shows 7-year average real safe rates, obtained from GDP-
weighted nominal rates and inflation in Italy, United Kingdom, Netherlands, Germany, France, United States,
Spain, and Japan since 1310. Latest observation: 2018.
Chart 2 is a remarkable figure, built from a remarkable dataset, one that was constructed
by a financial historian, Paul Schmelzing, who, a few years ago, worked at the Bank of
England and contributed this work to the Bank’s data archive (Schmelzing, 2020).
Now of course, even going from 50 to 800 years leaves us with still something of a
subsample. There are interest rates from even earlier periods going back several thousand
years (see Haldane, 2015). A large body of inscriptions on clay tablets and papyri that
have been dug up by archaeologists actually deal with economic records, including
oftentimes debt contracts. So debt, and therefore interest rates, and many of the
foundations of modern finance, actually go back millennia to ancient civilisations.
But in terms of a cleaned, codified, and somewhat standardised time series of interest
rates over several centuries, the work of Schmelzing stands out as being useful to us, and
not least because it is a continuous study that goes all the way up to the present day. It
records interest on debt issued by sovereigns, princes, churches and other debtors which
might be the closest analogues to today’s benchmark safe asset issuers. And what stands
out, to me, first and foremost as the central message of this chart is this: interest rates
have been declining for not just 50 years but for 800 years.
Bank of England Page 7
Now we have to ask: why? The data that we see here are just one part of the story. The
other parts of the story rely on history and theory, completing the three legs on which any
good work of economic history must rest.
So let me jump to theory, and then circle back to these historical data. Hopefully, after I
have tried to convince you that there are some useful analytical threads that run through
the last eight centuries, we will turn back to the present—the recent decades, the here and
now, and what comes next.
For this purpose, and in an act of gross simplification, let me divide the 800-year history of
interest rates into four broad epochs, and then try to bring a bit of economic history to bear
on the interest rates in each period.
1. The pre-Modern period, which I will take to mean the Malthusian era before the
onset of the full-steam Industrial Revolution and the broad development of modern
financial markets after 1800.
2. The ‘long’ 19th century growth acceleration up to 1914 via industrial development,
financial deepening, and the first era of globalisation, amid the first demographic
shift.
3. The ‘short’ 20th century, beginning with war, depression, war, and followed by the
slow and reconstruction of economic and financial structures in the midst of a
second demographic shift up to the 1990s.
4. The 21st century so far, of accelerated globalisation, and financialisation, of a third
demographic shift of pronounced ageing, with continued wealth accumulation, and
slower growth (so far).
What I plan to do is to come back to each of these four periods in turn and try to interpret
them through some economic lenses.
Before I can do that, I will first need a basic theoretical framing, a toolkit to explain what I
am doing.
4. Theoretical drivers in the very long run
What is our theoretical setup going to be? It is shown in Chart 3 and is a very simple and
stylised view of the determinants of interest rates as well as savings and investment in an
economy populated by savers and borrowers.
Bank of England Page 8
Chart 3: A simple model of savings and investment
Savers, think of households, on net, or those acting on their behalf, supply funds to the
loan market. Borrowers, think of firms, on net, borrow funds in these markets to invest in
productive assets that will be the basis of economic growth in the future. And this is a
single economy, a closed economy, for the time being. This exposition resembles one of
the earliest, or perhaps the first, discussion about the neutral rate of interest put forward by
Knut Wicksell in the late 1800s.2
Of course, it is a big simplification. In reality, some households borrow, some firms lend,
and government may also be in the picture. But here we will just think of the net flows to
focus on the main forces. Gross flows will be much bigger than these net flows, for these
reasons, and that is one explanation as to why the financial system is so large.
The diagram shows the interaction between households’ supply of funds via savings and
firms’ demand for funds to use for investment. The horizontal axis is the quantity of
savings and investment, and on the vertical axis is the price, the real interest rate, nominal
minus inflation, the real cost of borrowing and the real return on lending. As real rates
increase, savers are incentivized to save more by higher rates of return, but borrowers are
similarly incentivized to invest less given the high cost of borrowed funds. So the savings
supply curve slopes up and the investment demand curve slopes down.
We will think of the intersection point in this picture as describing a steady state
equilibrium, one with full employment and stable inflation, and where savings equal
investment so that the simple financial market has demand equal to supply. In that case,
2 Wicksell, K. (1898). Interest and Prices.
R e a l
in te re
10
8
r*6
4
2
0
0
s t ra te
20
In v e s tm
d e m a
40
e n
n d
t
S =60 I S 80
S a v in g s
s u p p ly
a v in g s a n d in 100 v e s tm e n t 120
Bank of England Page 9
the equilibrium real rate is what is usually called the natural rate, famously known by the
symbol 𝑟∗. This is the real interest rate that results when all shocks to the economy, both
real and nominal have fully dissipated.
If you think those conditions are never obtained, you are right: shocks never fully dissipate,
and there are always new ones coming along. This picture, the equilibrium, will never be
seen. And thus 𝑟∗ as shown is not actually an observable concept. But despite all that, 𝑟∗
is a very real economic object and one of great importance, as it is the central tendency of
the real interest rate, the mean toward which we are always reverting.
So in the very long run, even if shocks move the real rate around in the short run, we
should see real rates, on average, tending to steer close to 𝑟∗.
And then, going back to our historical problem, we can ask how the model can be useful.
And that means asking what are the relevant shifts in the patterns of saving and
investment that determine 𝑟∗ and what might have made them change in the course of
history?
Let me list a few prime candidates, the historical movers that economic research has
identified as relevant for our problem.
1. Property rights: Savers feel less certain that they will actually receive the amount
they have been promised when they lend. A contractual mechanism. See Chart 3a.
2. Financial frictions: Banks or other market participants become less efficient or
competitive. An intermediation mechanism. See Chart 3a.
3. People want to save more, and firms invest less out of caution. They are more
afraid in a more risky economic environment. A risk or uncertainty mechanism. See
Chart 3b.
4. People want to save more, and firms invest less because growth prospects are
weaker. A growth mechanism. See Chart 3b.
5. People want to or can afford to save more for future needs, due to a propensity to
save out of higher incomes, fewer children, and/or a longer expected life/retirement.
A demographic mechanism. See Chart 3c.
6. There appear some external forms of capital inflow which increase available funds
in the home economy. A global spillovers mechanism. See Chart 3c.
There may be other forces to consider but these are some of the main ones, and although
the quantity implications can be ambiguous, as for example in Chart 3b, in each case the
directional impact on 𝑟∗ is clear and intuitive.
Bank of England Page 10
Chart 3: Drivers of r* in the simple model of savings and investment
a) A friction in the market due to poor property rights or costly intermediation
b) Higher savings and lower investment due to elevated uncertainty or weaker growth
c) Savings glut due to higher propensity to save, demographic change, or capital inflows
R e a l
in te re
10
r*8
6
4
2
0
0
R e a l
in te re
10
8
6
r*4
2
0
0
s
s
t
t
ra
ra
te
te
20
20
In v e s tm
d e m a
40
In v e s tm
d e m a
40
e n
n d
e n
n d
t
t
60
60
S 80
S 80
S a v in g s
s u p p ly
C o s t o f
fric tio n
a v in g s a n d in 100
S a v in g s
s u p p ly
a v in g s a n d in 100
v
v
e
e
s
s
tm
tm
e
e
n t 120
n t 120
Real
interestrate
Savings
10 Investment supply
demand
8
6
r*4
2
0
0 20 40 60 80Savingsan10d0 investme1n2t0
Bank of England Page 11
5. History seen through the lens of theory
Let me now dive back into history and try to give an account of the last 800 years of
interest rates. Obviously, such an account will be multicausal not monocausal, a sensible
way to go despite the standard temptation in economics to shoehorn everything into one
theory. Here our theoretical toolkit is well suited without being too specific, allowing for
multiple factors to change the equilibrium and the resulting natural rate in different epochs.
Let me turn to the first epoch, the years from the Middle Ages to the 1800s in Europe, and
with special attention to Britain. In this pre-industrial era, growth was slow as rates of
productivity advancement were minimal, and the population was, at least early on, often in
a Malthusian stasis. Incomes and wealth were low and few people had much beyond
subsistence. Financial intermediation was poor until at least the 1700s, and somewhat
embryonic even after that. With both investment opportunities and sources of savings very
repressed, the question then remains, what kept the interest rate so high?
I think the answer lies in the first and second examples we considered – property rights
and financial frictions. Financial frictions were indeed high, given the primitive state of
banking and capital markets. But perhaps even more of a binding constraint was the often
unreliable nature of financial contracts. In a world of often arbitrary property rights and
weak rule of law, returns were never sure, and confiscation or default risks were high. The
investor in a project might not see the payoff; and any payoff might not translate into
repayment of the lender. That meant a risk premium that would end up in the price, in the
equilibrium real interest rate 𝑟∗.
Only over many centuries would that environment change, and only slowly through
changing property rights, rule of law, and contract enforcement. In British history we think
of 1215, 1688, and many other points along the road. For even just the most basic
financial channels to function reasonable smoothly, institutions needed to change. In the
words of the economic historian Eric Jones, these centuries saw not a slew of
technological advances, but a removal of impediments setting the stage for things to
come:
What was important instead was the slow planing away of roughness and risk, so
that entrepreneurs might not merely maximise profits but retain them too. And as
interest rates were brought down so choices among investments became technical
exercises in deciding what the market demanded, rather than matters of guessing
merely where it was least risky to hazard resources. The economy became
regulated by economic rather than political decisions.3
3 Eric Jones, The European Miracle: Environments, economies and geopolitics in the history of Europe and
Asia, 3rd edition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 234-235. In the lead up to this passage,
Bank of England Page 12
Let me now turn to the second epoch, from around 1800 to 1914, marking the onset of
modern economic growth and global economic integration. In Britain, after the war’s end in
1815, the Industrial Revolution gathered steam in the first half of the 19th century, and the
first era of globalisation took shape in the second half of the 19th century. The first
demographic transition unleashed for a time a population boom. The financial sector grew
to a hitherto unprecedented size, and Britain led the way as the financial capital of the
world in this era, the first true full-scale era of finance-capitalism which channelled savings
into enterprise at home and then increasingly overseas.
Both savings supply and investment demand were up, relative to their moribund levels in
centuries past. But which was pushing harder? How did rates move? Interest rates had
briefly suffered their biggest upward spike in centuries during the Napoleonic war; hardly a
surprise as it was a very expensive war: British government debt peaked at 213% of GDP
(Hills, Thomas & Dimsdale, 2010). But after Waterloo, as time wore on, interest rates
returned to their inexorable downward path. The great wave of savings was in full flow, its
pace running well ahead of the surging investment demands of even the heavy industrial
age.
Through the lens of our models, I think we can interpret this as a combination of a growth
shock (potentially raising 𝑟∗) and rising global capital demand after 1870 (also potentially
raising 𝑟∗), but also a 19th century savings glut at home and a continued diminution of risks
and frictions in the finance sector (acting to lower 𝑟∗) with the latter dominating.
It was a world now made safer for savers, and unsurprisingly, many more savers there
would be. But that was also because at the same time incomes rose and the economy had
decisively broken out of the Malthusian trap. Initially, saving may have been the domain of
only the very wealthy in previous centuries, but saving was now spreading to the middle
classes, whose incomes were advancing far away from subsistence, and whose financial
concerns end up grist for many a Victorian novel. The sources of saving grew rapidly at
home. Interest rates fell further, and the downforces on 𝑟∗ were quite strong, even
absorbing an increasing demand from the rest of the world after 1870 as financial
integration brought a new source of demand for abundant British funds from abroad.
Integration meant further downforce as home savings were freer to roam when the pace of
economic growth decelerated in the Edwardian era and home investment needs abated.
Jones quotes the famous line of Smith that ‘Little else is requisite to carry a state to the highest degree of
opulence from the lowest barbarism, but peace, easy taxes, and a tolerable administration of justice; all the
rest being brought about by the natural course of things.’
Bank of England Page 13
Let me now turn to the third epoch, the 20th century. Perhaps this ought to be broken up
further into two halves.
If we are asking the question of what could stop the downforce on interest rates, the first
decades of war and depression and another war did not cause a decisive break. Economic
growth was subdued and a shift to greater risk and economic (and policy) uncertainty
compounded the urge to save more and invest less due to precautionary motives. Those
sentiments would be lodged for some time, and shape savers’ financial behaviour even
after 1945 (Malmendier & Nagel, 2011 and Malmendier & Shen, 2024).
Governments borrowed on a large scale again, but often used new techniques of financial
repression to keep interest rates low, so we are not entirely sure of the market equilibrium
in these times of war and its aftermath, in financial markets just as in other markets. Add to
this the arrival of inflations and hyperinflations after the 1914 break from gold, and
observed real interest rates became very volatile, as we saw in Chart 2.
All that said, we emerged in the post-war period of the 1950s with real rates at about the
same level we had last seen them before the dislocations of 1914-1945. A pause perhaps
but no decisive break from the 800-year trend. That would very briefly change, chiefly for
an unusual and time-specific demographic reason: the Baby Boom. This event, through its
subsequent echo in the 1970s and 1980s, would momentarily boost investment and
economic growth, against an already rapid growth backdrop, and those expanding
investment needs would, for a generation, just nose ahead of savings supply that was
being held back by the same growth and demographic mechanism. Older children entered
the workforce which grew at a faster pace, while younger children put downward pressure
on household savings. In that moment, the trend of 800 years was held in check.
But that countertrend didn’t last long. One reason was a downshift in growth rates again
from the 1970s onwards. An even bigger and more persistent force derives from another
demographic pattern, which this time wasn’t a one-off blip, like the Baby Boom, but a
permanent shift in our population patterns that endures today and into the infinite future as
far as we can see: Ageing. The old person. And, increasingly, as time has gone by, the old
person with savings. And those savings were increasingly needed to finance the
increasingly lengthy period of retirement in old age, that had simply never been much of a
possibility in previous epochs, and which, beyond a baseline level, could not be provided
for out of state pension provision alone.4
4 This may explain why it is hard, if not impossible, to find a statistically significant relationship between
demographics and interest rates in sample periods prior to the late 20th century. The motive to save for
retirement was weak to non-existent given prevailing life expectancies (see for example Rogoff, Rossi &
Schmelzing, 2024).
Bank of England Page 14
The continuation of those trends well describes the times we have been living in since, the
fourth epoch.
The savings glut of the old has rolled on and on, and the average wealth of ageing
individuals seems to rise with age not fall, as was pointed out by former MPC member Jan
Vlieghe in his speech here at LSE almost exactly four years ago. Moreover, the
savings glut of the old seems to be particularly strongly felt in the space of safe assets (like
fixed income) as opposed to risky assets (like equity), which may be a reflection of the
variation in risk preferences across different age groups (Kopecky & Taylor, 2022). For
that reason, this new ageing pressure on returns to capital may be more powerfully and
differentially felt on debt yields, and thus on 𝑟∗, than in any other asset returns.
We have also seen other savings glut pressures. Capital flows to poor countries were
common in the 19th century and even in the 1960s and 1970s. In recent decades, capital
tends to flow more uphill, especially public savings in the form of foreign currency reserves
and sovereign wealth funds which have pushed savings into the advanced economies. So,
global forces have been acting to push the 𝑟∗ in advanced economies down, not up
(Bernanke, 2005 and Rachel and Summers, 2019). A further savings glut may be driven
by inequality, if the rich have higher propensities to save, and this force has also been in
play (Mian, Straub & Sufi, 2020 and Mian, Straub & Sufi, 2021).
Summing up this history of how we got here and what it means for where we go next, I
would make two points.
First, for most of our peacetime history one or more of the following five conditions was
met:
1. a poor financial contracting environment;
2. an inefficient, backward financial sector;
3. very few people able to save or incentivized to do so by ageing;
4. a high pace of economic growth at home requiring investment;
5. strong demand for borrowing from abroad.
Each of these forces acted during one or more phases of history to prop up the natural
rate, 𝑟∗. They came and went, but one by one they have gradually fallen away, and for the
first time in history all five forces are absent. This is why we are where we are.
Second, and looking forward, the absence of these five factors seems to me likely to
continue at least in the near term. Those who believe that 𝑟∗ may rise in the near future,
which is not my view, presumably have strong reasons to think that some kind of reversal
on at least some of these dimensions is likely. Let me speculate on where, if at all, that
seems likely.
Bank of England Page 15
I will not speak to items 1, 2, or 3; if we are to have a collapse of rule of law then we will
have bigger things to worry about than 𝑟∗; a return to inefficient financial markets, a going
backwards, also seems unlikely to me; and the desire to save for retirement seems to be
destined only to get stronger, as ageing progresses further all over the world.5
That leaves items 4 and 5: some reason for more investment to support growth, or a
reversal of the global savings glut in poorer countries. Whilst many people propose the
first, and we may have some updraft from the climate transition or AI, based on the
numbers I have seen, the investment needs may not be of such a magnitude as to match
what we saw in the peak investment age from the 1800s to the mid-1900s when heavy
industrial and infrastructure needs were at their apex.
If anything, I wonder about the last item, the possible reversal of capital flows from poor to
rich countries; it will depend on how well each country can finance its own investments
through home savings (their demographic shift to ageing is even faster), and it will matter
just as much how the institutional environment adapts to boost growth and attract foreign
investment. But at best, they would have a large capital accumulation gap to fill, and if that
kicks into gear even with partial force it would be felt in global capital flow pressures.
I doubt it, but I would be happy to be proved wrong, as it would mean rapid economic
development in many poorer countries would be getting underway. Rather I think the 21st
century 𝑟∗ will be defined most of all by yet more ageing: an even greater savings glut of
the old, but now accelerating to become a global phenomenon, in more emerging
developing countries, and it will be an important shift and likely a big challenge for us all.
6. Where now? Trend and cycle in advanced economies
Now, given what has been presented so far, you might be asking: If 𝑟∗ is not directly
observable, how can we measure it?
For that, we need a model. And preferably one that captures the time dimension, unlike
the simple, static demand-and-supply model I showed above. I said before that 𝑟∗ is
something like the mean that real rates will revert to when shocks wash out. However,
since at any point in time what we observe is not the steady state, and departures from
steady state can be very persistent, inference about 𝑟∗ requires more than a statistical
trend-cycle decomposition—although all models of this class tend to be, in the end, some
sort of fancy moving average.
5 I should mention here that, as Charles Goodhart has pointed out, there might be a countervailing force in
ageing societies which again puts upward pressure on 𝑟∗ (Goodhart and Pradhan, 2020). That is, when the
dis-saving of the retired outweighs the saving of the still-in-work, then our supply curve can again shift
inwards.
Bank of England Page 16
The models that we have of 𝑟∗ typically embody restrictions that are consistent with some
economic theory of what that steady state might look like. For example, if we posit that the
steady state is one where demand and supply in the goods market are in balance (i.e. the
output gap is closed), and that inflation is at its target or some long-run trend rate, and we
have estimates of the structural equations governing the world, then we can design a filter
which, at any point in time, yields that real rate which is consistent with those conditions
being true.
What I have described is a version of probably the most well-known and widely used 𝑟∗
model, that is, the New York Fed’s. It was first estimated by Thomas Laubach and John
Williams for the United States in 2003 and later extended to other countries in Holston-
Laubach-Williams (2017). Their model is a semi-structural version of the New Keynesian
model with a Phillips curve and an IS curve. And, crucially, it has time-varying trends which
they back out using the Kalman filter.
Many other 𝑟∗ models have subsequently built on this tradition.6 My own preference is for
a macro-financial state-space model, which joins up the macroeconomic block of the
Laubach-Williams model with the financial block of a standard affine term structure model
of the government bond yield curve, as described in my recent work with coauthors (Davis
et al., 2024). There we estimated 𝑟∗ across a group of advanced economies. To briefly
explain a bit of the methodology, the macro block models the lower-frequency long-run
stochastic trends in inflation and 𝑟∗, and the finance block allows higher-frequency cyclical
bond market fluctuations around these trends (where 𝑦̅ is the average yield on
𝑡
government bonds, and 𝜖 𝑐𝑦𝑐 is a cyclical disturbance which includes risk factors):7
𝑡
𝑦̅ = 𝑎 +𝑏 𝜋∗ +𝑏 𝑟∗+ 𝜖 𝑐𝑦𝑐
𝑡 𝑦 𝜋 𝑡 𝑟 𝑡 𝑡
For this speech, I have updated the estimation of this model and taken it up to the latest
quarter (2025Q1). Chart 4 shows point estimates of the real neutral rate for five advanced
economies (US, UK, Japan, France, and Germany) since the 1990s, using the non-
recursive variant of the model with a two-sided Kalman filter to capture the smooth long-
run trends using the full sample of data. The estimates are reasonably precise, with 95%
confidence intervals of about 50 to 150 basis points.
6 Other models of this type, placing more or less restrictions on the structural parameters, include the
Richmond Fed’s Lubik & Matthes (2023) and Ferreira & Shousha (2023). Another class of models includes
certain structural Overlapping Generations (OLG) models. These are valuable not necessarily for estimating
today’s 𝑟∗ at business cycle frequency, but allow for forward-looking inferences based on expected
demographic changes, productivity growth, and the impact of factors such as climate change and climate
change policies as well as emerging technologies like AI (for example, Kopecky & Taylor, 2022 and Cesa-
Bianchi, Harrison & Sajedi, 2023).
7 See also Cieslak & Povala (2015) and Bauer & Rudebusch (2020).
Bank of England Page 17
Chart 4: Neutral rate estimates for G5 economies
Percent
Source: Davis et al. (2024) and Bank calculations. Latest observation: March 2025.
Several features of the chart stand out. First, 𝑟∗ has been on a strong downward trend in
all the countries. Second, real rates began in positive territory between 3% and 7%. Third,
in the recent period after the financial crisis of 2008, these trends have approached and, in
some cases, passed through zero and into negative territory. Fourth, the overall ranking of
rates today bears some intuitive relationship to fundamentals like growth rates and
demography. In Japan and the euro area growth is slow and ageing is further advanced. In
the UK and US these downforces are not yet as pronounced.8
Finally, note the levels and their relatively smooth profile in recent years. Neutral rates
have ticked up a little bit from the lows seen during the years of the pandemic period, but
they have not moved massively.
What might this imply for the neutral nominal rate? The point estimate of 𝑟∗ for the UK is
about 0.75% per annum for Q1 2025, similar to the levels that were seen in the UK in
2015-2016. Adding 2% for our inflation target, we reach a nominal neutral rate of 2.75%,
and around that we might place a suitable confidence band to keep in mind possible
measurement error to arrive at a range of 2.25% to 3.25%, which I don’t think is a
particularly controversial or unusual range for such an estimate.9
8 Without financial frictions and with free flow of capital, one would expect neutral rates to converge across
countries. However, these frictions exist, and they cause persistent cross-country gaps between neutral
rates. See, for example, Cesa-Bianchi, A., Lloyd, S., Sajedi, R., Sampaolesi, M. A. (forthcoming). "The
Natural Rate of Interest in Small-Open Economies: Asymmetries and Fragmentation", mimeo.
9 This is applying the 95% posterior interval at the end of the UK 𝑟∗ series in Davis et. al. (2024), which is a
range of roughly 100 basis points.
P e rc e n t
8
6
4
2
0
-21
9 9 0
J a p a n
1 9 9 5
F r a n c e
2 0 0 0
U n ite d S ta
2 0
te
0 5
s
2 0 1 0
G e r m
2 0 1
a
5
n y
U n ite
2 0 2 0
d K in g d o m
2 0 2 5
8
6
4
2
0
-2
Bank of England Page 18
7. Where next? My near-term outlook
Now to conclude, on two happy notes. Our model provides us with an end point for the
interest rate. That, in turn, allows me to provide you with an end point for this lecture.
Should we close in to a state of the world where all shocks have mostly dissipated, I would
expect Bank Rate to normalise at close to the central estimate of 2.75%. That means with
Bank Rate currently at 4.25% we still have a long way to go to get to neutral, and our
current policy is still quite restrictive, as we can see from Chart 5, which plots the path of
UK 𝑟∗ against the ex-post real short term rate both in the past an as implied by our May
2025 MPR forecast. Here, the aqua line measures the inflation-adjusted return that an
investor would have made over each four-quarter period by investing their money at Bank
Rate.
Chart 5: UK ex-post real short-term rate and r*
Percent
Source: Office for National Statistics, Davis et al. (2024), Bank of England, and Bank calculations. Notes:
The ex-post real short-term rate is calculated as the four-quarter rolling average of Bank Rate less annual
CPI inflation over the same four quarters. It is projected forward using the May 2025 MPR forecast. Latest
observation: 2025 Q1 (realised), 2028 Q2 (forecast).
To say a little more about that May 2025 MPR forecast: There is a bump in inflation in
2025, due to one-off factors like taxes and administered prices (which is also why there is
a dip in the real rate forecast at the start of the horizon). There may be a small excess of
inflation over target in 2026, but by late 2026 we are again very close to 2%, and the
forecast sees a degree of slack opening up in the economy, with unemployment rising to
5%. I would expect Bank Rate, should those projections be close to what we actually see,
P e rc
1 0
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-1 01
9
e
9
n
0
t
U K
1 9
e x
9 5
-p o s t r e a l s h o
2 0 0 0
r t-te r m r a te
2 0 0 5 2
U
0
K
1 0
r e a l n e u tr a
2
l r
0 1
a
5
te r *
M
2 0
a y
2 0
2 0 2 5 M P R
2 0 2 5
1 0
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-1 0
Bank of England Page 19
to be near neutral, say around 3% by the end of 2026, if inflation still sits a bit above
target.
However, our forecast is based on a market curve that anticipates a much higher level of
rates in 2026 and 2027, levelling off between 3½ and 4%. In my view, given my estimate
of 𝑟∗, that would imply continued, and even increasing restrictiveness in our monetary
policy stance in 2026 and into 2027, as shown in this chart. This, to my mind, risks pushing
inflation below target and opening up an unduly large degree of slack.
These considerations were behind my votes in May and June, in the last two MPC
meetings. In February and March, I had voted with the majority to make one 0.25% cut in
February and no cut in March.
That quarterly pace of cuts has been often associated, by some financial market analysts,
with a ‘gradual’ pace of loosening. I was happy at that time to wait and let more data
materialize to be sure that we understood the bump, we had more insight into wage and
services inflation dynamics, and hopefully more clarity of the uncertain and shifting global
economic environment.
Recently, I have felt more assurance on these three factors. The 2025 bump remains but
is expected to subside as the causal factors peel away with a 12-month lag. The incoming
data suggest wage settlements of about 3.7% in 2025, a big step down from last year, and
close to a target-consistent level, and labour market slack has opened up and is
expanding. Globally, trade war tensions remain, despite the many pauses, and both the
uncertainty effect and the mechanics of trade diversion imply downside risks to our
inflation forecast.
So in the near term I see stronger disinflationary forces building up over the rest of this
year, and then in the medium term I see a need to reach for a lower neutral level over the
course of 2026 and 2027 should we be able to normalize smoothly. For those two reasons,
I was persuaded to not only vote for a lower level of Bank Rate now but also to signal the
need to be on a lower path over the year to come.
I also think that, for the reasons given, we remain restrictive such that for me a better risk
management approach at this point is to cut and hold for longer later, rather than hold too
much, and have to cut in a hurry later. I think of this as a form of insurance.
I am now near the end of my first year on the MPC and over that time much has changed.
I think the balance of risks has shifted. We are having to look through a lot more noise and
focus on the direction of the underlying trends at home and the mounting risks around the
world. The constellation of these deeper forces continues, in my view, to push in a
direction that is weakening demand faster than supply and generating a lot of downside
risk for our economy. Optimism has faded and geoeconomic storms have blown in.
Bank of England Page 20
Many could imagine a soft landing a year ago, but I think that soft landing is at risk. I think
right now some insurance against deteriorating demand is advisable, and I think
macroeconomic history shows that insurance is best taken out sooner rather than later.
For sure there will be future shocks, and our policy interest rate must react to them as they
materialise, to get the degree of restriction or accommodation right. But, as I have argued
tonight, that is something to be judged relative to neutral.
So I will leave you with what is, if you like, the paradox of monetary policy making:
We know we will never see the end of the road, but we must always be looking for it.
The views expressed in this speech are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or
the Monetary Policy Committee.
Thanks to Lennart Brandt and Vitor Dotta for help preparing this speech, and to Andrew
Bailey, Natalie Burr, Olly Bush, Ambrogio Cesa-Bianchi, Christoph Herler, Simon Lloyd,
Catherine L. Mann, Martin Seneca, and Fergal Shortall for helpful comments.