Bank of England Page 1
Strategy and stance –
remarks by Huw Pill
Given at the London campus of the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business
23 April 2024
Bank of England Page 2
Remarks
Thanks very much to our hosts at the London campus of the University of Chicago Booth
School of Business today.
My last public remarks were delivered on St. David’s Day in Cardiff. Today, I am speaking
on St. George’s Day in London. There is a pattern emerging here!
In my comments this morning, I plan to discuss what has happened in the intervening eight
weeks.
Overview
I don’t want to hold you all in suspense, so let me start with my main message: in my view,
against the background of a welcome decline in headline inflation, the outlook for UK
monetary policy in the coming quarters has not changed substantially since the beginning
of March.
As regards the MPC’s monetary policy strategy, the recent publication of
Ben Bernanke’s review of the Bank of England’s macroeconomic forecasts (and their role
in the monetary policy process) is a significant event. But it is one that will influence policy
over a matter of years, rather than in the shorter term.
As I said in Cardiff – and as has been underscored by subsequent remarks of the
Governor and others – the Bernanke review represents a once-in-a-generation opportunity
to renew and improve the MPC’s framework for monetary policy and its communication.
It will provide significant impetus to the work that has already started to re-build the
technological and data infrastructure for monetary policy analysis at the Bank. And it will
be a catalyst for the new thinking we need to make the MPC’s policy process more robust
to the heightened and profound uncertainties that face – and will continue to
face – monetary policymakers globally.
I am an enthusiastic supporter of the MPC’s decision to embrace Dr. Bernanke’s twelve
recommendations and to act upon them decisively in the coming months and years.
Turning to more immediate matters, the flow of conjunctural data over the past couple of
months has offered little relevant news to alter my assessment of the monetary policy
stance.
For sure, the world has not stood still. Events in the Middle East are a reminder of potential
external risks to UK inflation, even if their impact thus far on energy prices or international
Bank of England Page 3
supply chains remains modest – at least in comparison with the impact of the pandemic or
invasion of Ukraine on these inflation drivers in recent years.
As I anticipated in Cardiff (and based on the most recent vintage of data), in recent months
economic growth in the UK has resumed, albeit at a modest pace, following the technical
recession we experienced in the second half of last year.
Headline consumer price inflation has fallen further, largely on the back of external and
base effects. Given what will happen to utility bills in the coming months owing to the
continuing correction in European wholesale natural gas prices, we can be increasingly
confident that – as the MPC has long expected – headline CPI inflation will fall close to the
2% target in the coming months.
But the MPC’s framework for assessing the inflation outlook rightly remains more focused
on the persistent component of consumer price inflation, as assessed through
developments in the three key indicators of inflation persistence identified by the
Committee: services price inflation, pay growth, and the tightness of the UK labour market.
The evolution of this persistent component will determine whether inflation returns to target
on a lasting and sustainable basis. Establishing the resulting environment of price stability
will support efficient investment and spending decisions, thereby driving the economic
innovation, dynamism, and productivity growth upon which all our living standards
ultimately depend.
Evaluating the MPC’s key indicators of inflation persistence – and looking through the
unavoidable month-to-month noise in the data (compounded at present by concerns about
the reliability of certain key indicators in the face of statistical challenges) – my reading is
that there has been little news in recent months.
As a result, I see little reason to deviate from my assessment in Cardiff. We are now
seeing signs of a downward shift in the persistent component of inflation dynamics. But we
still have a reasonable way to go before I am convinced that the persistent momentum in
underlying inflation has stabilised at rates consistent with achievement of the 2% inflation
target on a sustainable basis.
While that persistent component of inflation continues to threaten the lasting achievement
of the 2% inflation target, the MPC will need to maintain a degree of restrictiveness in its
monetary policy stance. That is necessary to squeeze the persistent component out of the
system.
In Cardiff, I concluded that, while we are making satisfactory progress in returning inflation
to target, in my baseline scenario the time for cutting Bank Rate remained some way off.
Bank of England Page 4
That justified my vote to keep Bank Rate unchanged at the MPC’s February meeting and
underpinned my subsequent decision to vote similarly in March.
Taken together, the absence of news and the passage of time have brought a Bank Rate
cut somewhat closer. But the same absence of news gives me no reason to depart from
the baseline that I established in Cardiff.
Of course, we might be confronted with new challenges that necessitate an immediate
monetary policy response. As a general proposition, we must always be alert to this
eventuality and stand ready to act (in either direction) as appropriate.
But if events play out as I anticipated when speaking on St. David’s Day – and as I
continue to anticipate now on St. George’s Day – the conclusions I drew about the inflation
and policy outlook in Cardiff would remain valid.
Before turning to your questions, I hope you will allow me to expand a little on four key
issues underlying this view of the MPC’s appropriate policy stance.
Monetary policy stance
A systematic approach. At the heart of my current assessment of the monetary policy
stance lies an application of the framework established by the MPC to assess the
persistence of UK inflation.
As I argued in Cardiff, for the MPC to act and communicate in an effective way, it needs to
behave in a consistent and systematic manner. That will help to create a mutual
understanding of how monetary policy is being formulated between the MPC, on the one
hand, and its external audiences in the public, financial markets, and the media, on the
other.
Such a common understanding makes monetary policy more effective and helps to
coordinate complex private economic behaviour on a socially desirable outcome – price
stability.
This is why establishing and following a well-defined framework is so important.
Using the framework helps focus both the MPC’s internal discussion and the attention of
our external audiences on the right issues: (1) the prospects for the persistent component
of inflation, the component that will still be embedded in price developments once the
famously long and variable lags in monetary policy transmission have run their course; and
(2) the influence exerted by the currently restrictive stance of monetary policy on the
evolution of that persistent component of inflation.
Bank of England Page 5
In his recent report, Dr. Bernanke pointed to the risk of incrementalism in the construction
of the MPC’s forecast and analysis. If the Committee remains beholden to the same
framework and simply updates its analysis from one meeting to the next based on the data
flow, there is a danger that more fundamental changes in the outlook might be missed.
Our assessment of inflation persistence may be particularly prone to this risk. As I have
argued in the past, by nature the underlying and persistent component of UK inflation
should not change too much on a meeting-to-meeting basis: there is an ‘end-point
problem’ in filtering low frequency signals about persistence from the noisy flow of
month-to-month data. The Committee may be lulled into thinking that not much is changing
in the nexus of domestic prices, costs, profit margins and wage dynamics that governs the
persistence of UK inflation, even as the behaviour of price and wage setters might be
changing fundamentally.
The need for challenge. To manage this risk, Dr. Bernanke suggests that the
incorporation of data news into our meeting-to-meeting assessment should be
complemented by a periodic deeper questioning of the underlying Weltanschauung
governing our analysis of the inflation process.
As I have already acknowledged, one trigger for that re-assessment would be a big new
disturbance to the UK economy. Paraphrasing Keynes’ famous dictum: if the world
changes, so should our monetary policy.
As a result, all the MPC’s policy assessments are conditional – something that is both
crucially important and hard to communicate. Those statements – and indeed my own
views expressed in these remarks – should be understood as descriptions of a specific
scenario rather than promises of what the MPC will deliver. The MPC always needs to be
able to do ‘whatever-it-takes’ to deliver inflation at the 2% target as shocks occur and
circumstances change.
Another reason for a change in the inflation Weltanschauung could be a reappraisal of the
drivers and prevalence of inflation persistence in the domestic price / cost / profit / wage
nexus. Even if there is no new data or shock to this system, the Committee may come to
view the existing information in a new way – say because of the advent or application of a
new model or theory. Rather than seeing different things, we might come to see things
differently.
It is certainly important for conventional wisdom to be challenged. Based on excellent
analysis conducted by my colleagues on the Bank of England staff, I am sure that the
MPC will have robust discussions over the coming weeks about the character of UK
inflation ahead of our May decision.
Bank of England Page 6
But, for me, the hurdle to changing my assessment of inflation persistence over the
coming few months is relatively high. I do think that the persistent component of inflation is
being squeezed out of the system by restrictive monetary policy. But I don’t see reason to
believe that is happening more rapidly or profoundly than I expected six months ago. Most
importantly, in my eyes the MPC’s framework for assessing that persistent component of
inflation remains as sound as ever.
It has always been understood that monetary policymakers need to balance the need to
follow a systematic approach to responding to data, on the one hand, with a flexible
attitude to dealing with previously unforeseen circumstances, on the other.
That is the essence of the “constrained discretion” essential to the Bank of England’s
inflation targeting strategy from its outset. It also underpins the ‘rule-based, but not
rule-bound’ approach to formulating policy that I discussed in Cardiff. It is crucial that the
MPC achieves the right balance between acting systematically within a consistent
framework and being pragmatic in the event of unanticipated challenges.
Risk management and moving beyond reliance on a central forecast. One way of
thinking about how to manage this trade-off is to adopt a risk management approach.
Dr. Bernanke suggests that the MPC has placed too much emphasis on the central
forecast for inflation (and the associated fan chart around it) in the past, both as a vehicle
for internal analysis and a framework for external communication of monetary policy. He
proposes reducing the importance of the central projection, perhaps by diversifying
analysis to embody other scenarios, policy simulations and cross-checks.
Applying such an approach to our current situation points to comparing the implications of
easing monetary policy too early when the degree of inflation persistence is greater than
assumed in our base case against the implications of maintaining restrictiveness for too
long when inflation is less persistent than we assume.
After several years of above target inflation rates and given the threat of persistent inflation
dynamics becoming embedded in expectations, in my view there are greater risks
associated with easing too early should inflation persist rather than easing too late should
inflation abate. This assessment further supports my relatively cautious approach to
starting to reduce Bank Rate.
More generally, undertaking such scenario analyses helps to frame and present the key
policy issue at present. If we were to continue to focus on a single central forecast and the
fan chart around it, we would not have the machinery to explore and explain how different
assessments of inflation persistence lead to different views about the policy stance.
Bank of England Page 7
Understanding how policy would respond to data news and its implications for the MPC’s
view on inflation persistence – the “what if” question at the heart of the current policy
debate – would be more informative for market participants and the public. Building and
refining the analytical machinery to make and present such exercises is an important part
of the agenda established by the Bernanke review.
Monetary policy transmission and the timing of Bank Rate cuts. Turning from my
assessment of the economic situation to the transmission of monetary policy, it is useful to
repeat a key element of my St. David’s Day remarks in Cardiff.
As I have already argued, the MPC currently needs to maintain restrictiveness in its
monetary policy stance. This is required to squeeze that persistent component of inflation
which threatens lasting achievement of the 2% inflation target out of the price and wage
setting process.
Much of the decline in headline inflation is attributable to external (or exogenous)
developments that are little influenced by the MPC’s policy decisions. Seeing headline
inflation fall towards target is therefore not a sufficient condition for withdrawing monetary
policy restriction. This is inherent to the MPC’s current framework and its focus on the
persistence of inflation. As such, it is the evolution of the persistent component, which is
influenced to a significant extent by the stance of monetary policy, that should drive policy
decisions.
The tentative decline in the persistent component of inflation that we have seen thus far
owes to the restrictive stance of monetary policy the MPC has established. Any decline in
inflation persistence we are seeing is therefore not a reason to think restrictiveness is no
longer required. Rather it is an illustration that the restrictiveness of monetary policy is
starting to have its desired effect.
The MPC needs to ensure sufficient restrictiveness to achieve the 2% inflation target on a
lasting and sustainable basis. Taking into account the lags in monetary policy
transmission, the Committee needs to maintain a restrictive stance until it is satisfied that
the process of squeezing out the excessive persistent component of inflation is complete.
But for no longer.
A cut in Bank Rate from current levels would not entirely undo the restrictive stance of
policy. For one thing, real interest rates – which may be more relevant for economic
decisions, and thus for the transmission of monetary policy – will rise should inflation and
shorter-term inflation expectations ease (as we are seeing). The MPC will need to take this
into account in setting Bank Rate. What’s more, since we are starting from a restrictive
stance, an initial cut in Bank Rate need not imply a shift into accommodative territory, but
rather simply an easing to a less, but still, restrictive position.
Bank of England Page 8
Monetary policy decisions always involve a balancing the risk of doing too little versus
doing too much. The current situation is no different in that respect. How and when I would
vote for a Bank Rate cut depend crucially on how such a policy decision transmits to
inflation, in particular along the money market yield curve.
That transmission depends on a number of factors that need to be monitored closely,
especially how potential changes in Bank Rate may influence both market and retail rates.
One example is the behaviour of mortgage rates.
Over recent months we have seen the rate on a new 5-year fixed rate mortgage decline
from the highs seen last autumn (and previously in the context of market dislocations
stemming from the LDI episode in October 2022). But for those households refinancing
their mortgages at present, the rate at which they are now able to fix their borrowing costs
is likely to be significantly higher than what they have been paying for the past two or five
years since their previous refinancing. And this has all taken place in a period where Bank
Rate has remained unchanged at 5¼% since last August.
Have interest rates fallen? Have they risen? Or have they stayed the same? Based on the
previous paragraph, one could make a case to answer ‘yes’ to all three questions
simultaneously. At a minimum, this suggests that assessing monetary policy and its
transmission simply through the level of Bank Rate is simplistic and potentially misleading.
Monetary policy strategy
As you have seen, many of the issues raised in Dr. Bernanke’s review already weigh on
my thinking about our current monetary policy choices.
But I want to caution against expectations that the Bernanke report will lead to a rapid
change in how UK monetary policy is presented.
The implications of the Bernanke review are potentially profound. They are likely to have
ramifications that run well beyond the construction and communication of macroeconomic
forecasts. The Bank of England’s response to Dr. Bernanke’s report recognised the need
for careful consideration of the conclusions and recommendations he makes. The
workstreams sketched out in that response will need to be developed further before a full
change programme can be formulated.
As I said in Cardiff, a monetary policy strategy plays two roles. (1) It provides a framework
for internal analysis and discussion that leads efficiently to timely and effective monetary
policy decisions. And (2) it creates a structure for the presentation of those policy
decisions and their rationale to external audiences (the general public, corporate leaders,
financial market participants, etc.).
Bank of England Page 9
Such a strategy can be likened to an iceberg: a relatively small part of the strategy is
visible externally above the waterline, but it sits upon a large internal mass below the
ocean’s surface.
At the Bank, we have commenced re-building the internal infrastructure for monetary
policy analysis. That investment is already underway, but since it is necessarily initially
focused on the internal machinery – starting with prosaic issues, such as dealing with
technology and data management – this has not been visible to our external stakeholders.
The publication of the Bernanke report provides renewed impetus to that work and
ensures that the momentum behind the renewal of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy will
extend to the more substantial external-facing elements. It signals the need for
prioritisation of work on this dimension and empowerment of the staff undertaking that
work.
There is a natural sequencing in pursuing this renewal. Getting the basics right in terms of
technological, data and analytical infrastructure is an unavoidable prelude to building new
models and frameworks that will eventually support the inflation scenarios and policy
simulations that Dr. Bernanke believes we should implement to support and augment our
forecast framework.
All this calls for patience. In exploiting the once-in-a-generation opportunity to renew the
MPC’s monetary policy strategy, we need to get the basics right internally before moving
forward to the presentational aspects that will be visible externally.
Form should follow substance, not lead it.
Concluding comments
To conclude, I will leave you with my main message.
Against a welcome backdrop of declining headline inflation anticipated by the MPC, the flow
of conjunctural data since I last spoke on the monetary policy stance in Cardiff in early March
has offered modest relevant news. This suggests little need to amend the assessment of
the economic, inflation and policy outlook that I offered then.
In Cardiff, I concluded that, while we are making satisfactory progress in returning inflation
to target, in my baseline scenario the time for cutting Bank Rate remained some way off.
That justified my vote to keep Bank Rate unchanged at the MPC’s February meeting and
underpinned my subsequent decision to vote similarly in March.
Bank of England Page 10
The combination of little news and the passage of time have brought a Bank Rate cut
somewhat closer. But the same lack of news gives me no reason to depart from the baseline
that I already established on St. David’s Day.
I look forward to your questions.
The views expressed in these remarks are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or
the Monetary Policy Committee.
I would particularly like to thank Saba Alam and Adrian Paul for their help in the
preparation of these remarks.
The text has also benefitted from helpful comments from Andrew Bailey, Sarah Breeden,
Fabrizio Cadamagnani, Alan Castle, Jonathan Haskel, Martin Seneca, Fergal Shortall and
Danny Walker for which I am most grateful.
Opinions (and all remaining errors and omissions) are my own.