DEV
search
Search Marquee
 
Sorry, no matches were found
Try a new search or use our popular apps
WEEKLY FX WRAP-UP
Weekly FX Wrap Up
Research | Economics | 11 September 2026 | 6:52PM UTC

USD: Dollar Depreciation Continues

We have attributed Dollar weakness over the last couple of months to three factors.

First, the perception that the FOMC has a high bar to tighten policy which also explains the Dollar’s minimal response to the recent CPI report, as well as a cross-asset reaction consistent with a high nominal growth environment rather than a hawkish Fed reaction function.

Second, the Treasury’s revealed preference to curtail higher yields.

Third, idiosyncratic policies to support some of the most undervalued currencies, especially in Asia.

The usual positive correlation between currencies and inflation surprises comes from an expectation that policymakers will push real rates higher.

In this regard, we still expect next week’s FOMC decision to be a pivotal one for the Dollar’s direction; any ultimate delivery of a hike should still be Dollar positive, though we see policy risks skewed to the downside, in part because of the uncertainty around next week’s decision.

Foreign FX policy is also pushing the Dollar lower and deeply undervalued currencies in Asia have been some of the biggest contributors to the Dollar’s recent depreciation

We have expected these policy headwinds to be offset over time by factors including “exceptional” US return prospects.

But recent developments have highlighted the difficulties along this path and that the policy response to these pressures an important input for the currency's outlook.

Lexi Kanter
Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, New York
alexandra.kanter@gs.com
© Copyright 2002-2026 Goldman Sachs All rights reserved.
Need help?
Contact Us

Use of this site is subject to the Terms and Conditions of Use updated as of 12 August 2024.
Marquee Regulatory Disclosures
Important Disclosure Information About Goldman Sachs Research
Please review our Interest Rate Benchmark Transition Notice, Privacy & Cookies Policy, Security, Market Data Attribution, Security Guidance and GS&Co.'s Statement of Financial Condition