search
Search Marquee
 
help_outline
notifications
person
search
article
Form a View
chevron_right
search
View to a Trade
chevron_right
monitoring
Manage Portfolio
chevron_right
scatter_plot
Data Services
chevron_right
cloud_download
Downloads
chevron_right
THOUGHT LEADERSHIP
chevron_left
Goldman Sachs Research
expand_more
Market Insights
expand_more
MarketView
chevron_right
Events
My Content
FX MORNING NOTES
GS FX Research Notes: Sterling into the BoE
Research | Economics | 17 September 2026 | 8:47AM UTC

The case for a BoE hike has been building in recent weeks. The majority of the MPC have favoured a cautious approach to responding to this year’s energy pressures, but the upside risks to inflation stemming from those pressures have increased recently. Energy prices are tracking above the ‘adverse scenario’ that the Bank had previously laid out, headline inflation has picked up more than the Bank projected, and by Q1 of next year our economists expect it to rise to levels where risks of second-round effects likely become more concerning. Our economists expect the BoE to hold today (on a 6-3 vote split) but hike in November, joining what is now a majority of G10 central banks to have tightened policy during the energy shock. At the same time, underlying inflationary pressures and forward-looking pay growth expectations are still more contained, and there are limited signs of overheating in the UK economy. To us, these underlying dynamics imply a particularly high hurdle for the BoE to out-hawk market pricing, with our economists’ forecasts implying the clearest dovish risks to market pricing through to end-2027 across the G10 central banks (first chart below).

We think these dovish risks to BoE hike pricing present meaningful but gradual downside risks to Sterling over the coming year. We think risks to the Pound from today’s meeting are skewed in the same direction, with a pricing-out of the remaining ~7bps of premium for a September hike likely to outweigh any boost from a hawkish delivery, in our view. Rate differentials have already been drifting in a Sterling-negative direction for EUR/GBP in recent weeks, which our GSBEER model reads as implying the cross should now be close to year-to-date highs. Instead, we think EUR/GBP’s actual stabilisation below 0.8600 is mostly a reflection of a meaningful compression in fiscal/political premium on a relatively smooth transition to a Burnham government, and on a sharp pace of capital inflows (including from M&A). We think it is likely that both these Sterling tailwinds have mostly run their course, implying to us clearer risk of GBP underperformance over time.

Charts of the Day: Our economists’ modal central bank expectations are dovish to end-2027 market pricing for all G10 central banks, but the gap is currently largest for the BoE.

 

Sterling’s outperformance this summer has been at odds with cyclical fundamentals.                          

Stuart Jenkins
Goldman Sachs International, London
stuart.jenkins@gs.com
Lexi Kanter
Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, New York
alexandra.kanter@gs.com
Teresa Alves
Goldman Sachs International, London
teresa.alves@gs.com
Karen Reichgott Fishman
Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, New York
karen.fishman@gs.com
Michael Cahill
Goldman Sachs International, London
michael.e.cahill@gs.com
© Copyright 2002-2026 Goldman Sachs All rights reserved.
Need help?
Contact Us

Use of this site is subject to the Terms and Conditions of Use updated as of 12 August 2024.
Marquee Regulatory Disclosures
Important Disclosure Information About Goldman Sachs Research
Please review our Interest Rate Benchmark Transition Notice, Privacy & Cookies Policy, Security, Market Data Attribution, Security Guidance and GS&Co.'s Statement of Financial Condition