DEV
search
Search Marquee
 
Sorry, no matches were found
Try a new search or use our popular apps
FX MORNING NOTES
GS FX Research Notes: A Pivotal CPI
Research | Economics | 11 September 2026 | 10:17AM UTC

Today’s pivotal August CPI report comes as the last major piece of inflation data ahead of next week’s September FOMC currently priced at ~70% implied odds of a hike. Our economists forecast a 23bps core print, close to consensus expectations, which they argue would be sufficiently benign to allow the Fed to remain on hold next Wednesday.

Outside of a notably soft June reading, core CPI has generally come in close to Bloomberg expectations in recent months, and has only driven relatively limited initial reactions in markets (first chart below). Strikingly, the CPI data have continued to drive significantly smaller average Dollar reactions so far this year than employment reports have, despite a range of Fed speakers having made it abundantly clear that the employment data is of secondary importance to the inflation data in informing their current policy views. We think the higher volatility in the payrolls data itself mostly explains this result, and we think the relative importance of the two sets of data to Fed voters is generally well understood.

At the same time, there is enough ambiguity in the FOMC’s reaction function to keep uncertainty elevated into next week under a range of CPI scenarios. We think a print close to expectations should dampen the FX vol response to today’s data and transfer that risk to next week’s reaction function reveal. 

On some of the practical considerations around the data, we note that this month of inflation data is one of the uncommon instances in having the PPI data released ahead of the CPI data, and in being due for a set of three methodological changes on the measurement of PCE inflation by the BEA alongside the August PCE report on September 30. The PCE-relevant components of yesterday’s PPI print led our economists to revise their August core PCE tracking estimate 2bps higher to 24bps. Meanwhile, we do not generally view overall core PPI inflation data as providing a reliable signal for the core CPI data.

Charts of the Day: Outside of a notably soft June reading, core CPI has generally come in close to Bloomberg expectations in recent months, and only driven relatively limited initial reactions in markets.

Cumulative surprises to the Bloomberg consensus on core CPI prints have trended lower over the past two years. 

Stuart Jenkins
Goldman Sachs International, London
stuart.jenkins@gs.com
Lexi Kanter
Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, New York
alexandra.kanter@gs.com
Teresa Alves
Goldman Sachs International, London
teresa.alves@gs.com
Karen Reichgott Fishman
Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, New York
karen.fishman@gs.com
Michael Cahill
Goldman Sachs International, London
michael.e.cahill@gs.com
© Copyright 2002-2026 Goldman Sachs All rights reserved.
Need help?
Contact Us

Use of this site is subject to the Terms and Conditions of Use updated as of 12 August 2024.
Marquee Regulatory Disclosures
Important Disclosure Information About Goldman Sachs Research
Please review our Interest Rate Benchmark Transition Notice, Privacy & Cookies Policy, Security, Market Data Attribution, Security Guidance and GS&Co.'s Statement of Financial Condition