search
Search Marquee
 
Form a View
View to a Trade
Manage Portfolio
Data Services
Downloads
THOUGHT LEADERSHIP
Goldman Sachs Research
Market Insights
MarketView
Events
My Content
WEEKLY FX WRAP-UP
Weekly FX Wrap Up
Research | Economics | 18 September 2026 | 6:48PM UTC

USD: Delivering stability

We think FX should remain in a low volatility regime under a range of likely economic scenarios.

On the one hand, the Dollar should be supported by solid US economic performance and bright prospective investment returns, and it is on the right side of the energy and carry themes that we think are key to the current backdrop.

On the other hand, negative Dollar impulses have come mostly on the policy side.

We think this back-and-forth can continue.

This week’s FOMC communication was more hawkish than we had expected, which, together with the shifts in commodity prices and risk sentiment, allowed the Dollar to recover off the low end of the recent trading range.

And the Fed’s decision to hike with a hawkish delivery should ease some of the market concerns about a captive Committee that have at times weighed on the Dollar.

That said our economists do not expect the FOMC to shift their approach to one try to substantially tighten financial conditions in a way that would be clearly more supportive for the Dollar, and we expect that an under-delivery relative to market pricing would weigh on the currency again.

In addition, China’s continued firm currency management should help contain broad Dollar moves.

Lexi Kanter
Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, New York
alexandra.kanter@gs.com
© Copyright 2002-2026 Goldman Sachs All rights reserved.
Need help?
Contact Us

Use of this site is subject to the Terms and Conditions of Use updated as of 12 August 2024.
Marquee Regulatory Disclosures
Important Disclosure Information About Goldman Sachs Research
Please review our Interest Rate Benchmark Transition Notice, Privacy & Cookies Policy, Security, Market Data Attribution, Security Guidance and GS&Co.'s Statement of Financial Condition